## **Branch-Solve-Merge Improves Large Language Model** **Evaluation and Generation**

**Swarnadeep Saha** [*] **Omer Levy** **Asli Celikyilmaz**
UNC Chapel Hill Meta Meta


**Mohit Bansal** **Jason Weston** **Xian Li**
UNC Chapel Hill Meta Meta



**Abstract**


Large Language Models (LLMs) are frequently
used for multi-faceted language generation and
evaluation tasks that involve satisfying intricate
user constraints or taking into account multiple aspects and criteria. However, their performance can fall short, due to the model’s lack of
coherence and inability to plan and decompose
the problem. We propose B RANCH -S OLVE   M ERGE (BSM), a Large Language Model program (Schlag et al., 2023) for tackling such
challenging natural language tasks. It consists
of _branch_, _solve_, and _merge_ modules that are
parameterized with specific prompts to the base
LLM. These three modules plan a decomposition of the task into multiple parallel sub-tasks,
independently solve them, and fuse the solutions to the sub-tasks. We apply our method to
the tasks of LLM response evaluation and constrained text generation and evaluate its effectiveness with multiple LLMs, including Vicuna,
LLaMA-2-chat, and GPT-4. BSM improves the
evaluation correctness and consistency for each
LLM by enhancing human-LLM agreement by
up to 26%, reducing length and pairwise position biases by up to 50%, and allowing LLaMA2-chat to match or outperform GPT-4 on most
domains. On a constraint story generation task,
BSM improves the coherence of stories while
also improving constraint satisfaction by 12%.


**1** **Introduction**


Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used
for various text generation tasks (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023b; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023). It has also
become common to employ them as evaluators of
such LLM generations in order to assess, critique
and improve the outputs (Zheng et al., 2023; Bai
et al., 2022b). However, LLMs still struggle with
tasks that have intricate requirements like satisfying a set of constraints or meeting objectives that


  - Work done during an internship at Meta.



are, in general, multi-dimensional (e.g., evaluating
the quality of generated text against certain diverse
criteria). This appears to primarily stem from the
model’s lack of self-consistency and inability to
plan (Yao et al., 2023b; Bubeck et al., 2023). Recent research has tried to mitigate these limitations
by developing iterative methods that involve eliciting reasoning, planning, and refinement, but so
far they are still considered as open problems (Bai
et al., 2022b; Madaan et al., 2023; Ganguli et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2023c; Chen et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2023).
In this work, we propose B RANCH -S OLVE  M ERGE (BSM), a decomposition method for solving such multi-faceted natural language tasks. Our
approach is an instance of a _Large Language Model_
_program_ (Schlag et al., 2023; Dohan et al., 2022)
and consists of three modules: _branch_, _solve_, and
_merge_ that are parameterized with specific prompts
to an underlying LLM. Given an arbitrary user task,
the ‘branch’ module generates a solution plan by
decomposing the task into multiple _parallel_ subtasks, where each sub-task is represented by a
unique branch, representing different components
required to solve the overall problem. The ‘solve’
module then solves each of these independent subproblems. Finally, the ‘merge’ module fuses the
solutions to these sub-problems to generate the
overall solution. We apply our method to two challenging tasks where LLMs are commonly utilized
but their performance still lags behind humans:

**Evaluation of LLM Outputs (Zheng et al.,**

**2023).** LLMs are now regularly used to perform
automatic evaluation of model responses, e.g., to
user queries (Dubois et al., 2023). Evaluating
LLMs holistically is challenging because of their
ability to generate long-form answers to arbitrary
user questions (Zheng et al., 2023), the lack of reliability originating from many biases (Zheng
et al., 2023; Wu and Aji, 2023; Wang et al.,
2023b), and reliance on hand-designed evalua

Figure 1: An illustration of B RANCH -S OLVE -M ERGE with LLaMA-2-70B-chat for pairwise evaluation of LLM
responses. Given a question and two LLM responses A and B, BSM generates a preference judgment. The Branch
module conditions on the question to generate a question-specific evaluation plan which in this case consists of
different criteria like ‘Relevance’ to the Hawaii trip topic, ‘Clarity’, etc. The ‘Solve’ module evaluates the response
pairs for each criteria (branch) independently and the ‘Merge’ module combines the individual judgments to generate
the final verdict, in this case that B is the better response.



tion plans that impact the method’s generalization, introducing unintended human biases (Liu
et al., 2023; Wu and Aji, 2023). BSM can be applied to this task by each branch assessing different aspects and criteria that require evaluation. [*]

- **Constrained Text Generation.** State-of-the-art

LLMs struggle with constrained text generation
tasks, e.g., the constraint of writing a story that
should include several concepts. Models commonly either violate constraints, or else generate
text that is incoherent in order to satisfy these constraints (Bubeck et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a).
BSM can be applied to this task by each branch
writing part of the story satisfying only some of


  - Subsequently, we will refer to the task as ‘LLM Evaluation’. In the scope of our study, this will involve the pairwise
evaluation of the response quality of two LLM outputs.



the constraints, followed by a final merge.
We apply BSM to both these problems, see Fig. 1
and Fig. 3, and evaluate its effectiveness with multiple open-source and black-box LLMs of varying sizes and strengths including LLaMA-2-7Bchat (Touvron et al., 2023), Vicuna-33B (Chiang
et al., 2023), LLaMA-2-70B-chat, and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b). BSM significantly improves both
tasks, addressing the aforementioned limitations of
LLM evaluation and generation:

- BSM improves _correctness_ of LLM evaluation. In particular, on the MT-Bench benchmark (Zheng et al., 2023), BSM improves LLMhuman agreement for evaluating multi-turn questions belonging to different domains including
writing, coding, reasoning, and mathematics. For
example, compared to zero-shot prompting and


self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022) baselines,
BSM with LLaMA-2-70B-chat improves LLMhuman agreement by up to absolute 26% and
even matches or outperforms GPT-4 on many domains. BSM with GPT-4 improves agreement by
a further 3% over GPT-4. Overall, these findings
point to BSM’s ability to evaluate LLM responses
to arbitrary user questions from diverse domains
and to improve any base LLM as an evaluator.

- BSM also improves the _consistency_ of LLM evaluation. It significantly reduces position, length,
and self-enhancement biases of LLM-based eval
uators. For instance, BSM with LLaMA-2-70Bchat reduces position bias by up to absolute 50%.
Importantly, BSM with GPT-4 also improves
GPT-4’s reliability as an evaluator when evaluating its own responses.

- For the constrained story generation task, BSM
generates more coherent stories, which are preferred by a GPT-4 judge a substantial 93% of the
time compared to a zero-shot baseline. It also
improves constraint satisfaction by 12%.

Overall, BSM provides a framework for planning and task decomposition for addressing challenging multi-faceted language generation and evaluation tasks. As the approach is framed as a generic
LLM program, it can be applied to any underlying
LM and potentially a wide range of tasks.


**2** **Related Work**


**LLM Programs and Decomposing Complex**
**Tasks.** LLM programs such as BSM solve complex
problems with an algorithm that breaks the problem down into multiple steps and each step is then
parameterized with a different prompt to an underlying LLM (Schlag et al., 2023; Dohan et al., 2022;
Creswell and Shanahan, 2022). Complex tasks, in
general, require task decomposition (Khot et al.,
2022) and planning (Yao et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2022; Yao et al., 2023b; Ning et al., 2023). This has
motivated a lot of recent work on advanced prompting methods (Khot et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023a; Dua et al., 2022; Saha et al.,

2022, 2023; Khot et al., 2021; Gupta and Kembhavi, 2023; Cho et al., 2023). However, most of
these works typically focus on reasoning problems
(like commonsense, symbolic, or mathematical)
that benefit from _sequential_ decompositions. We,
however, study tasks that benefit from branching
into _parallel_ decompositions, in particular LLM
evaluation and constrained text generation. As well



as being an LLM program, BSM is also an instance
of Graph-of-Thoughts (GoT) prompting (Lei et al.,
2023; Besta et al., 2023) because the execution
trace takes the shape of a graph. GoT defines a
wide array of LLM programs, including refining,
backtracking and skipping graph nodes, which we
do not consider here. Our work develops a specific
fixed program, and applies it to the challenging
tasks of evaluating or improving language models.


**LLM Evaluation.** A fundamental challenge with
the rapid progress of LLMs is evaluating their capabilities holistically (Chang et al., 2023; Liang et al.,
2022). Human evaluation is difficult and expensive (Smith et al., 2022). On the other hand, LLMs,
by being trained with RLHF, are shown to exhibit
alignment with humans (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022a). Hence, a standard procedure for
comparing and evaluating LLM generations is by
utilizing a strong LLM like GPT-4 (Bubeck et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2023a; Dubois et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023; Chiang and Lee, 2023; Wang et al.,
2023c; Hada et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) on different benchmarks (Zhong et al., 2023; Köpf et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2023). LLM-based evaluators
are not fair evaluators (Wang et al., 2023b; Wu and
Aji, 2023) and there have been proposals of using
multi-agent debate (Chan et al., 2023) or developing wider and deeper LLMs (Zhang et al., 2023). In
contrast, BSM improves LLM evaluation through
an intuitive and general decomposition-based approach that can be applied on top of any LLM to
evaluate responses for a wide range of tasks.


**Constrained Text Generation.** Recent works

evaluate LLMs for their capabilities in the more
difficult setting of controllable and constrained text
generation (Keskar et al., 2019; Dathathri et al.,
2019; Lu et al., 2021, 2022; Lin et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2022) and show that even GPT-4 struggles
with such planning-based tasks (Bubeck et al.,
2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a). We
experiment with such a constrained story generation task and show the promise of BSM.


**3** **B** **RANCH** **-S** **OLVE** **-M** **ERGE**


We first introduce some notation to formally describe BSM. Let _p_ _θ_ denote an LLM with parameters _θ_ . We also denote _x_ = _x_ 1 _,···,n_ as a sequence of
_n_ tokens, such that _p_ _θ_ ( _x_ ) = [�] _[n]_ _i_ =1 _[p]_ _[θ]_ [(] _[x]_ _[i]_ _[|][x]_ [1] _[,][···][,i][−]_ [1] [)] [.]
BSM is an LLM program that aims to solve complex planning-based tasks with three neural mod

ules: branch, solve, and merge. Each module is
parameterized with unique prompts to the LLM _p_ _θ_ .
The LLM program further defines an algorithm on
top of these modules, acting as a controller and
invoking a module at each step of the algorithm.


**3.1** **Components of B** **RANCH** **-S** **OLVE** **-M** **ERGE**


**LLM Program.** For a given task, BSM defines a controller as an algorithm that lays
out the transition logic between the modules.
Let us denote the three modules with their
functional forms: branch( _·_ ), solve( _·_ ), and
merge( _·_ ) . Then the program is defined as Prog :
( _x,_ branch( _·_ ) _,_ solve( _·_ ) _,_ merge( _·_ )) _→_ _y_, taking as
input a task instance _x_, along with the module implementations and generating an output _y_ .


**Branch Module.** Given a task, the branch module generates multiple sub-tasks where each subtask is represented by a unique branch. Branching into sub-problems allows task decomposition
such that each part can be solved independently
in parallel, at which point the partial solutions are
combined. Formally, given a task input _x_, we define a ‘branch’ prompt prompt branch ( _x_ ) that can
be wrapped around _x_ with branching instructions
and some demonstrations (if available). Conditioning on the prompt, the LLM _p_ _θ_ generates a
set of _k_ sub-problems _X_ = _{x_ [(1)] _, x_ [(2)] _, · · ·, x_ [(] _[k]_ [)] _}_,
where _k_ is referred to as the branching factor. The
sub-problems are generated auto-regressively as a
sequence of tokens: _X ∼_ _p_ _θ_ ( _X|_ prompt branch ( _x_ )) .
Importantly, the flexibility of our method comes
from the fact that for a given problem, the LLM
itself decides (generates) the sub-problems and the
corresponding branching factor.


**Solve Module.** The solve module solves the task
at hand by generating an output _y_ [(] _[i]_ [)] for a branch
task input _x_ [(] _[i]_ [)] . Similar to the branch prompt, we
define a ‘solve’ prompt prompt solve ( _x_ [(] _[i]_ [)] ), conditioning on which the LLM generates a solution
_y_ [(] _[i]_ [)] _∼_ _p_ _θ_ ( _y_ [(] _[i]_ [)] _|_ prompt solve ( _x_ [(] _[i]_ [)] )) for each branch.


**Merge Module.** The merge module fuses the solutions to the sub-problems to generate a global
solution to the main problem. This is done through
a ‘merge’ prompt prompt merge ( _Y_ ) that generates
a merged solution _y ∼_ _p_ _θ_ ( _y|_ prompt merge ( _Y_ )),
conditioning on a set of sub-solutions _Y_ =
_{y_ [(1)] _, y_ [(2)] _, ···, y_ [(] _[k]_ [)] _}_ . Conceptually, the merge module learns an aggregator function that could aggregate a set of values (using an aggregation operator)



or fuse pieces of text, depending on the task.
Next, we motivate and conduct case studies of
BSM with two challenging NLP tasks: LLM evaluation and constrained generation.


**3.2** **BSM: Case Study with LLM Evaluation**


**Task Description.** We consider the task of evaluating LLM-based chat assistants. Formally, given
an open-ended question and a pair of responses
from two LLM agents, the task requires producing a preference judgement of which response is
better or if it is a tie (see Fig. 1). Evaluating LLM
responses is challenging for many reasons:
1. **Long-form answers to arbitrary questions.**
With the goal of providing a general-purpose
assistant, the user asks arbitrary questions from
any domain, and the LLM responds with longform answers (Zheng et al., 2023). Based on the
initial model response, the user can ask followup questions. Depending on the type of question,
the evaluation process must consider the intent
of the question, what is expected from an ideal
response, and what criteria to evaluate on.
2. **LLM evaluators are prone to biases.** LLMbased evaluators are not reliable and are prone
to different biases including (a) _Position Bias_ :
evaluation changes based on the encoding order
of the responses, (b) _Length Bias_ : tendency to
favor longer responses, (c) _Self-enhancement_
_Bias_ : the LLM-evaluator favoring its own responses (Zheng et al., 2023).
3. **GPT-4 as evaluator is expensive.** While APIbased models like GPT-4 are fairly good evaluators (Zheng et al., 2023), these models are
proprietary and charge users per token generated. Current open-source alternatives correlate
less well with humans and are much more sus
ceptible to the aforementioned biases.
4. **Hand-designing evaluation plans is not scal-**
**able.** A robust evaluator should generalize well,
capable of evaluating responses to arbitrary
questions and hence, hand-designing the evaluation plan for every task is not desirable (Liu
et al., 2023). For example, see Fig. 1, where
evaluating responses to a ‘writing’ question
requires considering factors like ‘Relevance’,
‘Clarity’, etc whereas if the question is a ‘coding’ question (see Fig. 2 in the Appendix), one
should evaluate for ‘Code Correctness’, ‘Code
Readability’, etc.
Hence, given the multi-faceted nature of this
evaluation task, we develop a version of BSM, as


described below. For this study, we focus on evaluating two-turn conversational questions although
our method is generally applicable for any number
of turns. Let us denote the first question as _q_ 1 and
the follow-up question as _q_ 2 . Let the responses
from the two LLMs _A_ and _B_ be _r_ 1 [(] _[A]_ [)] and _r_ 1 [(] _[B]_ [)] for
_q_ 1, and _r_ 2 [(] _[A]_ [)] and _r_ 2 [(] _[B]_ [)] for _q_ 2 .


**Branch Module for LLM Evaluation.** It generates an evaluation plan i.e., a set of evaluation
criteria that the response will be evaluated against.
The branch module only conditions on the input
question and for turn-1 questions, is defined as as
branch( _q_ 1 ), while for turn-2 questions, it conditions on both turn-1 and turn-2 questions, represented as branch( _q_ 1 _, q_ 2 ) . The output is a set of
evaluation criteria, branch( _q_ ) _→{c_ _i_ _}_ _[k]_ _i_ =1 [, where]
each _c_ _i_ is the title of the criterion (e.g., ‘Relevance’)
and a short description of how to evaluate for it
(e.g., ‘Assess how well the response aligns with
the user’s question ... and must-see attractions in
Hawaii.’). See Fig. 1 and 2 for examples of generated branches for different questions.


**Solve Module for LLM Evaluation.** It com
pares and evaluates the responses based on a specific criterion. The output of the evaluation is a
pair of scores (within a specified range, according
to the solving instruction, e.g., 1-5) for each of the
responses. For example, given an evaluation criterion _c_, we denote the solve module for a question _q_
as: solve( _q, r_ 1 [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ 1 [(] _[B]_ [)] _, c_ ) _→_ ( _s_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, s_ [(] _[B]_ [)] ), where
_s_ [(] _[A]_ [)] and _s_ [(] _[B]_ [)] are the evaluation scores assigned
to the two assistant responses. Note that the solve
module is not symmetric i.e., the encoding order of
the two responses is important (and we address this
below in our LLM program). The module additionally generates explanations along with the scores.
Fig. 1 shows example generations from the solve
module with a LLaMA-2-70B-chat model.


**Merge Module for LLM Evaluation.** We develop two variants of the merge module. A
simple non-neural variant sums up the scores
across all branches. We also develop a neural
LLM variant that conditions on the individual

evaluations and generates the final verdict with
a model-decided aggregation strategy, denoted
as merge( _q, {c_ _i_ _}_ _[k]_ _i_ =1 _[,][ {][s]_ [(] _i_ _[A]_ [)] _}_ _[k]_ _i_ =1 _[,][ {][s]_ [(] _i_ _[B]_ [)] _}_ _[k]_ _i_ =1 [)] _[ →]_ _[y]_ [,]
where the evaluation criteria _{c_ _i_ _}_ _[k]_ _i_ =1 [are the out-]
puts of the branch module and _s_ [(] _i_ _[A]_ [)] and _s_ [(] _i_ _[B]_ [)] are the
criterion-wise evaluations (scores and explanations)



of the two assistant responses generated from the
solve module. The final verdict is _y ∈{A, B, tie}_ .


**LLM Program for LLM Evaluation.** The overall LLM program pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1. To account for position bias, the program
executes two independent runs of BSM by swapping the encoding order of the responses in the
‘solve’ module. The final judgment is either ‘A’ or
‘B’ if and only if the judgement is consistent for
both orders, otherwise it is a ‘tie’.


**3.3** **BSM: Case Study with Constrained Gen**


**Task Description.** Our next case study shows the
general applicability of BSM by applying it to a
completely different task, that of LLM generation.
We consider a constrained story generation task –
given a set of concepts _l_, the task is to generate
a coherent story _y_ by including all concepts in it
(see Fig. 3 in the Appendix). When the number
of concepts is large, LLMs tend to either leave out
some concepts or generate text that is incoherent.
The task requires composition incorporating the
various constraints.


**Branch Module for Constrained Generation.**
The branch module branch( _l_ ) _→_ ( _l_ 1 _, l_ 2 _, t_ ) proposes a story generation plan, consisting of (1) two
subsets of concepts _l_ 1 and _l_ 2 and (2) a story topic _t_ .
The two subsets represent sub-problems of the original task with a smaller number of concepts. The
story topic ensures that all sub-stories generated as
part of BSM belong to the same topic.


**Solve Module for Constrained Generation.**
The solve module solve( _l_ _i_ _, t_ ) _→_ _y_ _i_ conditions
on a subset of concepts _l_ _i_ and the story topic _t_
to generate a story _y_ _i_ on that topic, while also including all concepts in _l_ _i_ . Intuitively, ‘solving’ the
constrained generation task is easier with a smaller
number of concepts.


**Merge Module for Constrained Generation.**
The merge module merge( _y_ 1 _, y_ 2 ) _→_ _y_ conditions
on two intermediate stories and fuses them together
to generate the final story _y_ . Since both intermediate stories belong to the same high-level topic, the
fusion can lead to a final coherent story. Overall,
BSM ensures better constraint satisfaction by solving sub-problems and maintains coherency through
a top-level plan that includes a story topic.


**4** **Experiments**


**4.1** **Large Language Model Evaluation**


**4.1.1** **Experimental Setup**


**Dataset.** We experiment with the MT-Bench
dataset, that evaluates LLMs as judges of other
LLM’s responses when acting as helpful AI assistants in multi-turn conversations (Zheng et al.,
2023). It consists of instructions from 8 diverse
domains e.g., writing, reasoning, math, coding, etc.


**Evaluation Metrics.** We evaluate BSM (and
baselines) using the following four metrics.

- **LLM-Human Agreement (Ag).** Following past
work (Zheng et al., 2023), we report LLM-human
agreement _∈_ [0 _,_ 1] individually for turn-1 and
turn-2 questions, and their combination.

- **Position Bias (PB).** To evaluate whether BSM
helps reduce the consistency problem with LLMbased evaluators, we report PB, which is the
fraction of samples where the judgment changes
based on the encoding order of the responses.

- **Length Bias (LB).** We measure LB as the fraction of samples where humans prefer the shorter
response but the evaluator model does not. In
other words, we compute how often an evaluator
chooses the longer response when according to
human preference, it should not.

- **Self-enhancement Bias (SB).** SB refers to an
evaluator model preferring its own responses.
Evaluating this bias in isolation is challenging
because knowing when the model is choosing
its own response because of this bias and not
for another reason is an interpretability question.
However, the question we are interested in studying here is the following: _When an LLM is eval-_
_uating its own responses (which is a common_
_phenomenon when using LLMs as evaluators),_

_does BSM lead to better and more reliable eval-_

_uation?_ We measure this by considering the following setting. We use GPT-4 as the base judge
model and consider the subset of samples from
the MT-Bench benchmark where one of the re
sponses is _also_ generated by GPT-4. If BSM with
GPT-4 improves human-agreement for this subset of samples, it suggests that _even_ in scenarios
where model A is judging its own outputs, BSM
(with model A) leads to a better evaluator. While
this does not necessarily compute whether an
evaluator has less SB, it does verify whether the
evaluator model correlates better with humans

even when it is evaluating its own responses.



While multiple past works have highlighted the
importance of these biases (Zheng et al., 2023; Wu
and Aji, 2023), we measure all of them with concrete metrics within the same evaluation frame
work. Conceptually, ‘Ag’ evaluates _correctness_
while ‘PB’ for example evaluates _consistency_ of
LLM-based evaluators. These are complementary
aspects and an ideal evaluator should perform well
in all metrics for it to be reliably used.


**Implementation Details.** We develop BSM on
top of multiple LLMs of varying scales and capabilities: LLaMA-2-7B-chat, Vicuna-33B, LLaMA-270B-chat, and GPT-4. We implement all modules
zero-shot, providing only module-specific instructions and assuming no access to demonstrations of
how to branch, solve, or merge.


**Baselines.** We compare our method, BSM, to
(1) **two variants of zero-shot prompting with**
**the same LLM** : a relative evaluator, that directly
generates a preference judgment and an absolute
evaluator, that generates two scores for the two
responses and then the final preference is determined based on the higher score, (2) **plan&solve**
**prompting** (Wang et al., 2023a), which plans (i.e.,
generates evaluation criteria) but instead of solving
them independently, solves all branches together
in one LLM call, (3) **self-consistency** (Wang et al.,
2022), which samples multiple evaluations from
the prompted LLM (with temperature 0 _._ 7 ) and
chooses the majority vote as the final judgment.
For fair comparison, self-consistency samples the
same number of generations as the branching factor
in BSM. We also note that self-consistency is a simple special case of BSM, where the branch module
spawns multiple instances of the _same_ underlying
problem (instead of sub-problems), solves them
by sampling different solutions, and the merging
operator is a majority vote. Refer to Appendix A
for more details about the dataset, implementation,
and baselines.


**4.1.2** **Main Results**


**BSM improves LLM-human agreement and re-**
**duces biases.** Table 1 evaluates the efficacy of
BSM with LLaMA-2-70B-chat as the base LLM,
specifically focusing on the ‘writing’ category of
questions from the MT-Bench benchmark. We report our main findings below.

- **Overall agreement.** We find that BSM improves
LLM-human agreement for both turn-1 and turn2 questions, compared to all baselines. In partic

Overall Turn-1 Turn-2
Method

Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Zero-shot (Relative) 0.43 51.66 54.88 0.53 42.66 50.00 0.34 60.66 59.42
Zero-shot (Absolute) 0.45 30.00 48.87 0.56 19.33 43.75 0.34 40.66 53.62
Plan&Solve 0.43 43.00 54.13 0.43 42.00 51.56 0.43 44.00 56.52
Self-Consistency 0.52 35.66 48.12 0.57 32.00 45.31 0.47 39.33 50.72
BSM **0.55** **17.33** **39.09** **0.60** **14.66** **39.46** **0.50** **20.00** **39.13**


Table 1: Comparison of zero-shot LLM evaluators (Relative and Absolute), Plan&Solve, Self-Consistency, and
BSM on the ‘writing’ questions in the MT-Bench dataset. All methods use LLaMA-2-70B-chat as the base LLM.
We report LLM-Human Agreement (Ag), Position Bias (PB), and Length Bias (LB) for turn-1 and turn-2 questions
overall, and individually. BSM improves agreement scores, and reduces position and length biases.



Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Zero-shot (w/ GPT-4) 0.51 **6.33** 36.36
BSM (w/ GPT-4) **0.54** 7.33 **34.54**


Table 2: BSM leads to less self-enhancement bias. BSM

obtains better agreement for the fraction of samples
where one of the responses is also generated by GPT-4.


ular, it obtains up to 12% absolute improvement
over Plan&Solve, which specifically shows the
utility of branching into and solving _indepen-_
_dent_ sub-problems. BSM also outperforms SelfConsistency. As noted earlier, Self-Consistency
is a special case of BSM. This result is noteworthy because both approaches leverage similar
amounts of compute in generating multiple solutions – but branching and solving the differing
sub-problems provides superior results to solving
the same problem multiple times.

- **Turn-1 versus Turn-2 questions.** Evaluating
turn-2 questions is harder because it requires additional contextualization of the responses for the
turn-1 question. This is also reflected in all baseline methods (except for plan&solve) exhibiting
lower turn-2 agreement scores (e.g., zero-shot
results drop from 0.53 in turn-1 to 0.34 in turn-2).
BSM shows that a decomposition approach that
generates an evaluation plan is particularly helpful for evaluating long context questions, resulting in more improvements for turn-2 questions
(e.g., up to 16% improvement). An illustration is
shown in Fig. 2, in which for the turn-2 question,
the model generates ‘Adherence to Instructions’
as the first criterion to evaluate.

- **Position and Length Bias Reduction.** On top of
improving LLM-human agreement, BSM helps
reduce critical biases with LLM-based evaluators

(e.g., up to 34% reduction in PB). This is a direct consequence of BSM’s task decomposition
that helps reduce inconsistencies in evaluation.



Method Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-7B-chat) 0.39 62.33 54.88
BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-7B-chat) **0.41** **48.33** **53.38**


Zero-shot (w/ Vicuna-33B) 0.51 30.66 48.12
BSM (w/ Vicuna-33B) **0.56** **20.00** **42.85**


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-chat) 0.43 51.66 54.88
BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-chat) **0.55** **17.33** **39.09**


Zero-shot (w/ GPT-4) 0.59 17.33 39.09
BSM (w/ GPT-4) **0.62** **17.00** **36.84**


Table 3: Comparison of zero-shot evaluation and BSM
on ‘writing’ questions with different base LLM evaluators. BSM improves agreement for all models and
reduces biases for all models except GPT-4.


BSM’s reduction in LB could be attributed to

the following: when an evaluator branches into
different criteria, if ‘length’ is indeed one of the
criteria that the responses should be evaluated
against, it only counts as a single branch (i.e.,
one sub-problem) of the overall evaluation and
hence, branching allows the model to explicitly
evaluate for other criteria, beyond just length.

- **Self-enhancement Bias Reduction.** Table 2

evaluates self-enhancement bias by comparing
BSM (with zero-shot GPT-4) for the samples
where one of the responses is also generated by
GPT-4. We observe a 3% better correlation with

humans, suggesting that BSM improves evaluation even when the LLM judges its own outputs.


BSM not only leads to an improvement in overall
LLM-human agreement (as per the ‘Ag’ metric) but
also on the fraction of samples where one response
is generated by the same evaluator LLM (as per the
‘SB’ metric), thus pointing to its robustness as an
evaluation method. In summary, BSM improves
both _correctness_ and _consistency_ of LLM-based

evaluators.


**BSM improves upon all zero-shot base LLMs.**
We demonstrate the generalizability of BSM as an
LLM program by implementing it on top of four dif

Coding Reasoning Math
Method

Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) 0.47 52.33 51.32 0.47 38.00 48.75 0.52 45.66 50.56
BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) **0.61** **25.66** **42.47** **0.57** **20.33** **46.25** **0.64** **17.66** **34.83**
GPT-4 **0.61** **19.66** **38.93** **0.64** 22.66 53.75 0.62 19.00 39.32


Table 4: Reference-based LLM evaluation for ‘Coding’, ‘Reasoning’, and ‘Math’ question categories of MT-Bench.
BSM improves reference-based evaluations and for math, outperforms GPT-4.


Overall Turn-1 Turn-2
Domain Method

Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) 0.55 29.66 51.67 0.61 30.00 48.14 0.50 29.33 55.88
Roleplay BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) **0.61** **11.00** **40.26** **0.66** **10.66** **38.27** **0.56** **11.33** **42.64**
GPT-4 **0.64** 13.66 43.62 0.65 16.00 45.67 **0.63** **11.33** **41.17**


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) 0.40 70.66 51.82 0.46 61.33 51.47 0.33 80.00 52.08
Extraction BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) **0.55** **31.33** **40.24** **0.55** **32.00** **45.58** **0.44** **30.66** **36.45**
GPT-4 **0.71** **15.00** **33.53** **0.68** **13.33** **35.29** **0.75** **16.66** **32.29**


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) 0.46 59.33 55.31 0.50 52.66 51.19 0.43 66.00 61.40
Stem BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) **0.72** **10.33** **44.68** **0.70** **10.66** **40.47** **0.73** **10.00** **50.87**
GPT-4 **0.72** 13.66 46.80 0.68 16.66 44.04 **0.75** 10.66 **50.87**


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) 0.46 59.00 45.69 0.51 52.00 49.18 0.41 66.00 43.33
Humanities BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) **0.67** **18.00** **36.42** **0.63** **18.00** **39.34** **0.71** **18.00** **34.44**
GPT-4 **0.73** **14.00** 37.08 **0.70** 19.33 42.62 **0.76** **8.66** **33.33**


Table 5: LLM evaluation for ‘Roleplay’, ‘Extraction’, ‘Stem’, and ‘Humanities’ question categories of MT-Bench.
We compare LLaMA-2-70B-chat BSM with the baseline zero-shot method, and also report GPT-4 results. BSM
obtains significant improvements over the LLaMA baseline, and matches or is close to GPT-4 agreement in three of
the four domains, while sometimes outperforming GPT-4 in reducing biases.



ferent base LLMs, ranging from LLaMA-2-7B to
GPT-4. As shown in Table 3, BSM improves agreement with humans for all base LLMs, compared
to a zero-shot baseline. Even though zero-shot
GPT-4 is the state-of-the-art LLM-based evaluator,
applying BSM obtains a further improvement of
3%. Moreover, applying BSM to LLaMA-2-70Bchat makes it competitive with GPT-4 for turn-1
questions. BSM also significantly reduces position
and length biases for all models except for GPT-4.


**BSM generalizes to reference-based evaluations.**
We find that BSM also excels at _reference-based_
evaluations for complex tasks like in math, reasoning, and coding (Cobbe et al., 2021; Wei et al.,
2022). Following past work (Zheng et al., 2023),
we evaluate responses for these categories by first
generating an answer using GPT-4 and then appending it to the evaluation prompt, which is our
baseline in this experiment. For BSM, we then
follow a similar recipe by conditioning the ‘solve’
module on the GPT-4 generated answers. The key
assumption here is that these answers are curated
once and have limited variations unlike answers for

open-ended questions. Table 4 shows that BSM
significantly outperforms zero-shot baseline in all



categories (by up to 14% better agreement scores
and 27% better position bias in coding questions).
On Math, it even outperforms the state-of-the-art
GPT-4 evaluator, outperforming on all metrics.


**BSM generalizes across further domains.** Table 5 shows that BSM is capable of evaluating
generations for questions in other categories like
‘Roleplay’, ‘Extraction’, ‘Stem’, and ‘Humanities’,
with similar findings. See Appendix A.2 for details.


**Scalability of BSM’s branching.** One of the
core strengths of BSM is its scalability – it uses the
same branch prompt (in Fig. 4) for all evaluation
domains (e.g., writing, code, reasoning, etc). The
prompt only specifies the meaning of a branch for
a given task and the LLM is capable of generating
its own branches for different domains without any
human intervention. We observe almost no overlap
between the branch names of coding questions and
writing questions. For example, the most occurring ‘writing branches’ are _Clarity, Relevance, Cre-_
_ativity, Accuracy, Engagement, Coherence, Orig-_
_inality, Completeness, Grammar and Readability,_
_etc_ whereas the most occurring ‘coding branches’
are _Efficiency, Completeness, Accuracy, Correct-_


_ness, Code Readability, User Experience, Time Ef-_
_ficiency_ . Branches for questions belonging to the
same domain exhibit more overlap, as measured by
the names of the branches. For example, ‘Correctness’ is a branch that is generated for evaluating
almost all coding problems; however, their descriptions are different and problem-specific (see Fig. 2
for an example).


**4.2** **Constrained Text Generation**


**4.2.1** **Experimental Setup**

**Dataset.** Our constrained story generation task
is a more challenging variant of a generative commonsense reasoning task, CommonGen (Lin et al.,
2020). While the original task requires generating
a single coherent sentence from 3 or 4 concepts,
we increase the complexity of the task by having
the model generate a concise story consisting of 10
concepts (Madaan et al., 2023) [†] . We experiment
with 100 samples for the purpose of this study.


**Evaluation Metrics.** We evaluate the generated
stories along two axes: **constraints satisfaction**
and **overall story quality** . For constraints satisfaction, we report two metrics: (a) **All Present (AP):**
fraction of samples where all constraints are satisfied i.e., there are no missing concepts, and (b)
**Missing Concepts (MC):** average percentage of
missing concepts. Higher ‘all present’ and lower
‘missing concepts’ are preferable. We identify a
concept as missing if it does not appear in the story
in any word form. For evaluating overall story quality, we conduct a pairwise evaluation with GPT-4.
The evaluation prompt is provided in Fig. 7. To account for position bias in this pairwise comparison,
we follow our findings from the LLM Evaluation
task and conduct each evaluation twice, by swapping the order of the stories and preferring one story
over the other only if the evaluations are consistent.


**Implementation Details.** We evaluate BSM using LLaMA-2-7B-chat and LLaMA-2-70B-chat.
All modules generate text using greedy decoding.
For the branch module, the LLM is prompted to
divide the concepts into two groups.


**Baselines.** We compare BSM to (1) **zero-shot**
**prompting with the same LLM:** given a set
of concepts, directly generates the story, (2)
**plan&solve prompting**, that first proposes a story
topic (as a plan) and then generates a story on that


   - [https://github.com/madaan/self-refine/blob/](https://github.com/madaan/self-refine/blob/main/data/prompt/commongen/commongen_hard.jsonl)
[main/data/prompt/commongen/commongen_hard.jsonl](https://github.com/madaan/self-refine/blob/main/data/prompt/commongen/commongen_hard.jsonl)



LLaMA-2-7B-chat LLaMA-2-70B-chat
Method

AP _↑_ MC _↓_ AP _↑_ MC _↓_


Zero-shot 15.0 17.3 22.0 27.2

Plan&Solve 13.0 18.0 21.0 26.6

Self-Consis 19.0 16.6 24.0 20.1

BSM **23.0** **15.5** **28.0** **14.7**


Table 6: Constrained story generation evaluation results.
BSM (with both LLaMA-2 models) improves constraint
satisfaction in the generated stories.


topic, (3) **self-consistency**, where we first sample
multiple stories and then prompt the LLM again
to select one of the sampled stories that has more
constraints satisfied.


**4.2.2** **Results and Analysis**


**Constraint Satisfaction.** Our main results are

given in Table 6. They show that BSM with both
model variants outperforms all baselines on our
constraint satisfaction metrics. We also note that

this is still a challenging task even for a stronger
LLaMA-2-70B-chat model and the scale of the

model has little impact on constraint satisfaction.
For example, even BSM with LLaMA-2-70B-chat
omits at least one concept for 72% of the samples, echoing the findings from prior work that
constrained text generation is hard even for stateof-the-art LLMs (Yao et al., 2023a). We provide
an analysis of missing concepts in BSM in Appendix B.


**Overall Story Quality.** BSM not only satisfies
more constraints but almost always generates a
more coherent story. We find that in a head-to-head
comparison with the zero-shot prompting baseline
(with LLaMA-2-70B-chat), stories generated by
BSM are preferred a substantial 93% of the time
by GPT-4. This can be attributed to two aspects
of BSM. First, in each of the branches, the model
conditions on a lesser number of concepts and thus
generates intermediate stories that by themselves
are more coherent. Second, in the merging step,
the model is able to condition on these two interme
diate stories and generate a final story that further
improves the coherence.


**5** **Conclusion**


We presented BSM, an LLM program for improving LLM evaluation and generation. We conducted
two case studies with different implementations of
branch, solve, and merge modules, showcasing the
effectiveness and generalizability of BSM.


**Limitations**


We list the limitations of our work below.


1. Evaluating for safety, toxicity, and bias in
LLM generations is also critical for a holistic evaluation of LLMs, however, we do not
address this topic in our paper.


2. While BSM obtains improvements in length
bias, we note that measuring length bias
in isolation is challenging because knowing
whether the model prefers the longer response
because of its length (and not for another reason) is an interpretability question and humans also tend to prefer longer responses, especially for open-ended questions.


3. Recursive or multi-level BSM, in which an
LLM recursively branches into parallel subtasks is an interesting avenue for future work
but we do not explore this in this work due to
the increased computation cost.


4. Decomposition into parallel sub-tasks should
also help improve efficiency (e.g., compared
to sequential decompositions) (Ning et al.,
2023) but in this work, we instead focused
on improving the task performance.


**Acknowledgments**


The authors thank the reviewers for their helpful
comments and suggestions.


**References**


Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda
Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al.
[2022a. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862)
[reinforcement learning from human feedback.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2204.05862_ .


Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu,
Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini,
[Cameron McKinnon, et al. 2022b. Constitutional](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073)
[ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2212.08073_ .


Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz
Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski,
[Piotr Nyczyk, et al. 2023. Graph of thoughts: Solv-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09687)
[ing elaborate problems with large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09687)
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09687_ .



Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
[Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html?utm_medium=email&utm_source=transaction)
[learners.](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html?utm_medium=email&utm_source=transaction) _Advances in neural information processing_
_systems_, 33:1877–1901.


Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lund[berg, et al. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelli-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712)
[gence: Early experiments with gpt-4.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2303.12712_ .


Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu,
Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan
[Liu. 2023. Chateval: Towards better llm-based eval-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.07201)
[uators through multi-agent debate.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.07201) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2308.07201_ .


Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu,
Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Linyi Yang, Xiaoyuan Yi,
[Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. 2023. A sur-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03109)
[vey on evaluation of large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03109) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2307.03109_ .


Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and
[Denny Zhou. 2023. Teaching large language models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128)
[to self-debug.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128_ .


[Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. 2023. Can large](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870)
[language models be an alternative to human evalua-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870)
[tions? In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870) _Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of_
_the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-_
_ume 1: Long Papers)_, pages 15607–15631, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng,
Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion
[Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An open-](https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/)
[source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt](https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/)
[quality.](https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/)


[Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. 2023. Vi-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15328)
[sual programming for text-to-image generation and](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15328)
[evaluation. In](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15328) _NeurIPS_ .


Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
[Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022. Palm: Scaling](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311)
[language modeling with pathways.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2204.02311_ .


Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
[Nakano, et al. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168)
[word problems.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168_ .


[Antonia Creswell and Murray Shanahan. 2022. Faith-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.14271)
[ful reasoning using large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.14271) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2208.14271_ .


Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane
Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and
[Rosanne Liu. 2019. Plug and play language models:](https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1edEyBKDS)
[A simple approach to controlled text generation. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1edEyBKDS)
_International Conference on Learning Representa-_
_tions_ .


David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A Saurous,
[Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, et al. 2022. Language model](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10342)
[cascades.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10342) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10342_ .


Dheeru Dua, Shivanshu Gupta, Sameer Singh, and Matt
[Gardner. 2022. Successive prompting for decom-](https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.81/)
[posing complex questions. In](https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.81/) _Proceedings of the_
_2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural_
_Language Processing_, pages 1251–1265.


Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang,
Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2023. [Al-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14387)
[pacafarm: A simulation framework for methods](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14387)
[that learn from human feedback.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14387) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2305.14387_ .


Deep Ganguli, Amanda Askell, Nicholas Schiefer,
Thomas Liao, Kamile Lukoši ˙ ut ¯ e, Anna Chen, Anna ˙
Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Catherine Olsson, Danny
[Hernandez, et al. 2023. The capacity for moral self-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07459)
[correction in large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07459) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2302.07459_ .


[Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. 2023. Vi-](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2023/html/Gupta_Visual_Programming_Compositional_Visual_Reasoning_Without_Training_CVPR_2023_paper.html)
[sual programming: Compositional visual reasoning](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2023/html/Gupta_Visual_Programming_Compositional_Visual_Reasoning_Without_Training_CVPR_2023_paper.html)
[without training. In](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2023/html/Gupta_Visual_Programming_Compositional_Visual_Reasoning_Without_Training_CVPR_2023_paper.html) _Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF_
_Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-_
_nition_, pages 14953–14962.


Rishav Hada, Varun Gumma, Adrian de Wynter,
Harshita Diddee, Mohamed Ahmed, Monojit Choud[hury, Kalika Bali, and Sunayana Sitaram. 2023. Are](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07462)
[large language model-based evaluators the solution](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07462)
[to scaling up multilingual evaluation?](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07462) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2309.07462_ .


Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra,
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xiny[ing Song, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Large language](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01798)
[models cannot self-correct reasoning yet.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01798) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2310.01798_ .


Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and
[Igor Mordatch. 2022. Language models as zero-shot](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22a.html)
[planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for em-](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22a.html)
[bodied agents. In](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22a.html) _International Conference on Ma-_
_chine Learning_, pages 9118–9147. PMLR.


Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney,
[Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019. Ctrl: A](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05858)
[conditional transformer language model for control-](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05858)
[lable generation.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05858) _arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05858_ .


Tushar Khot, Daniel Khashabi, Kyle Richardson, Peter
[Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2021. Text modular](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.99/)



[networks: Learning to decompose tasks in the lan-](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.99/)
[guage of existing models. In](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.99/) _Proceedings of the 2021_
_Conference of the North American Chapter of the_
_Association for Computational Linguistics: Human_
_Language Technologies_, pages 1264–1279.


Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao
Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sab[harwal. 2022. Decomposed prompting: A modular](https://openreview.net/forum?id=_nGgzQjzaRy)
[approach for solving complex tasks. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=_nGgzQjzaRy) _The Eleventh_
_International Conference on Learning Representa-_
_tions_ .


Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte,
Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi-Rui Tam, Keith Stevens,
Abdullah Barhoum, Nguyen Minh Duc, Oliver Stanley, Richárd Nagyfi, et al. 2023. [OpenAssistant](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07327)
[conversations–democratizing large language model](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07327)
[alignment.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07327) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07327_ .


Bin Lei, Chunhua Liao, Caiwen Ding, et al. 2023.

[Boosting logical reasoning in large language mod-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08614)
[els through a new framework: The graph of thought.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08614)
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08614_ .


Xian Li, Ping Yu, Chunting Zhou, Timo Schick, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Omer Levy, Jason Weston, and Mike
[Lewis. 2023. Self-alignment with instruction back-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06259)
[translation.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06259) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06259_ .


Xiang Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy S
[Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2022. Diffusion-](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/1be5bc25d50895ee656b8c2d9eb89d6a-Abstract-Conference.html)
[lm improves controllable text generation.](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/1be5bc25d50895ee656b8c2d9eb89d6a-Abstract-Conference.html) _Advances_
_in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 35:4328–
4343.


Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris
Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Ku[mar, et al. 2022. Holistic evaluation of language](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09110)
[models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09110) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110_ .


Bill Yuchen Lin, Wangchunshu Zhou, Ming Shen, Pei
Zhou, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xiang
[Ren. 2020. CommonGen: A constrained text gen-](https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.165/)
[eration challenge for generative commonsense rea-](https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.165/)
[soning. In](https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.165/) _Findings of the Association for Computa-_
_tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2020_, pages 1823–1840.


Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang,
[Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-Eval:](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16634)
[Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human align-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16634)
[ment.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16634) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634_ .


Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang,
Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras, Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. 2022.
[Neurologic a* esque decoding: Constrained text gen-](https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.57/)
[eration with lookahead heuristics. In](https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.57/) _Proceedings of_
_the 2022 Conference of the North American Chap-_
_ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:_
_Human Language Technologies_, pages 780–799.


Ximing Lu, Peter West, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras,
[Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. 2021. Neuro-](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.339/)
[logic decoding:(un) supervised neural text generation](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.339/)


[with predicate logic constraints. In](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.339/) _Proceedings of_
_the 2021 Conference of the North American Chap-_
_ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:_
_Human Language Technologies_, pages 4288–4299.


Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler
Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang,
[et al. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651)
[self-feedback.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651_ .


Xuefei Ning, Zinan Lin, Zixuan Zhou, Huazhong Yang,
[and Yu Wang. 2023. Skeleton-of-thought: Large](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15337)
[language models can do parallel decoding.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15337) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2307.15337_ .


[OpenAI. 2023a. Evals is a framework for evaluating](https://github.com/openai/evals)
[llms and llm systems, and an open-source registry of](https://github.com/openai/evals)
[benchmarks.](https://github.com/openai/evals)


[OpenAI. 2023b. Gpt-4 technical report.](http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774)


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
[2022. Training language models to follow instruc-](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Abstract-Conference.html)
[tions with human feedback.](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Abstract-Conference.html) _Advances in Neural_
_Information Processing Systems_, 35:27730–27744.


Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
[Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language](https://insightcivic.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/language-models.pdf)
[models are unsupervised multitask learners.](https://insightcivic.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/language-models.pdf) _OpenAI_
_blog_, 1(8):9.


Swarnadeep Saha, Xinyan Yu, Mohit Bansal, Ramakanth Pasunuru, and Asli Celikyilmaz. 2023.
[MURMUR: Modular multi-step reasoning for semi-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.704)
[structured data-to-text generation. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.704) _Findings of_
_the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL_
_2023_, pages 11069–11090, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Swarnadeep Saha, Shiyue Zhang, Peter Hase, and Mo[hit Bansal. 2022. Summarization programs: Inter-](https://openreview.net/forum?id=ooxDOe7ZtBe)
[pretable abstractive summarization with neural mod-](https://openreview.net/forum?id=ooxDOe7ZtBe)
[ular trees. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=ooxDOe7ZtBe) _The Eleventh International Conference_
_on Learning Representations_ .


Imanol Schlag, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Asli Celikyilmaz,
Wen-tau Yih, Jason Weston, Jürgen Schmidhuber,
[and Xian Li. 2023. Large language model programs.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.05364)
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05364_ .


Eric Smith, Orion Hsu, Rebecca Qian, Stephen Roller,
[Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2022. Human](https://aclanthology.org/2022.nlp4convai-1.8/)
[evaluation of conversations is an open problem: com-](https://aclanthology.org/2022.nlp4convai-1.8/)
[paring the sensitivity of various methods for eval-](https://aclanthology.org/2022.nlp4convai-1.8/)
[uating dialogue agents. In](https://aclanthology.org/2022.nlp4convai-1.8/) _Proceedings of the 4th_
_Workshop on NLP for Conversational AI_, pages 77–
97.


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: [Open founda-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288)
[tion and fine-tuned chat models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2307.09288_ .



Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu,
Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
[2023a. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147)
[shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147)
[models. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147) _Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-_
_ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics_
_(Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pages 2609–2634, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai
Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui.
[2023b. Large language models are not fair evaluators.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17926)
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926_ .


Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le,
Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
[and Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves](https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw)
[chain of thought reasoning in language models. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw)
_The Eleventh International Conference on Learning_
_Representations_ .


Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack
Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu,
David Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A Smith,
[Iz Beltagy, et al. 2023c. How far can camels go?](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04751)
[exploring the state of instruction tuning on open re-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04751)
[sources.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04751) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04751_ .


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
[et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits rea-](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html)
[soning in large language models.](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html) _Advances in Neural_
_Information Processing Systems_, 35:24824–24837.


[Minghao Wu and Alham Fikri Aji. 2023. Style over sub-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03025)
[stance: Evaluation biases for large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03025)
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03025_ .


Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, Austin W Hanjie, Runzhe
[Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023a. COLLIE:](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08689)
[Systematic construction of constrained text genera-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08689)
[tion tasks.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08689) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08689_ .


Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
[Narasimhan. 2023b. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601)
[problem solving with large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2305.10601_ .


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022.
[ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language](https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X)
[models. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X) _The Eleventh International Conference_
_on Learning Representations_ .


Yao Yao, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. 2023c. [Be-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16582)
[yond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16582)
[reasoning in large language models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16582) _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2305.16582_ .


Xinghua Zhang, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Yangyu Lv,
Tingwen Liu, Fei Huang, Hongbo Xu, and Yongbin
[Li. 2023. Wider and deeper llm networks are fairer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01862)
[llm evaluators.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01862) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01862_ .


Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Zero-shot (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) 0.46 34.00 45.00
BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B-c) **0.48** **23.77** **40.25**


Table 7: Results of reference-free evaluation of ‘Rea
soning’ questions. BSM outperforms the zero-shot baseline in evaluating ‘Reasoning’ questions, even when
reference answers are not used (on a random subset of
100 samples).


Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2023.
[Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685)
[arena.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685) _arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685_ .


Wanjun Zhong, Ruixiang Cui, Yiduo Guo, Yaobo Liang,
Shuai Lu, Yanlin Wang, Amin Saied, Weizhu Chen,
[and Nan Duan. 2023. Agieval: A human-centric](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06364)
[benchmark for evaluating foundation models.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06364) _arXiv_
_preprint arXiv:2304.06364_ .


Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao
Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat, Ping Yu,
[Lili Yu, et al. 2023. Lima: Less is more for alignment.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11206)
_arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11206_ .


Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei,
Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, et al. 2022.
[Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning](https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM)
[in large language models. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM) _The Eleventh Interna-_
_tional Conference on Learning Representations_ .


**A** **Additional Experiments: LLM**
**Evaluation**


**A.1** **Experimental Setup**


**Dataset.** We experiment with the MT-Bench
dataset, that evaluates LLMs as judges of other
LLM’s responses when acting as helpful AI assistants in multi-turn conversations (Zheng et al.,
2023). It consists of 2400 LLM responses and
3000 expert human judgements. LLM outputs are
responses to 80 representative instructions from 8
diverse domains: writing, roleplay, extraction, reasoning, math, coding, knowledge I (STEM), and
knowledge II (humanities/social science). Each
question is a conversational question, consisting of
two turns, in which the turn-2 question is a followup to the turn-1 question. For each question, the
dataset consists of responses from 6 different LLMs
(Alpaca-13B, Vicuna-13b, LLaMA-13B, Claudev1, GPT-3.5-turbo, and GPT-4), resulting in 15
possible response pairs. Thus, the entire evaluation set consists of 300 response-pair samples per

category.



**Implementation Details.** Algorithm 1 shows the
LLM program. For better reproducibility, all modules in BSM generate text using greedy decoding.
For the branch module, the LLM is prompted to
generate a plan consisting of a maximum of five
evaluation criteria (which we found it adheres to in
experiments). For the merge module, we find that
the non-neural merge of summing up the criterionwise evaluations is simple and works well in practice, hence all our experimental results are reported
with that method. The prompts are shown in Figures 4 and 5. All experiments are run on an AWS
cluster of 8 A100 GPUs.


**Baselines.** All methods, including BSM, account
for position bias in the same manner, generating
a verdict for both encoding orders and choosing
the final verdict based on the individual verdicts
(assigning a tie if the two encoding orders disagree).
In particular, Self-Consistency computes majority
vote independently for each encoding order.


**A.2** **Results and Analysis**


**BSM generalizes well across domains.** In Table 5, we evaluate BSM’s ability to evaluate generations for questions in the categories of ‘Roleplay’, ‘Extraction’, ‘Stem’, and ‘Humanities’. We
find that BSM is robust and performs well across
domains in terms of improvement over the LLaMa2-70B-chat baseline, and approaches GPT-4 performance on several of the domains. In particular, on
the Stem domain, it is able to improve agreement
scores over the baseline by up to 26% (absolute),
match GPT-4, and even outperform it in terms of
position and length biases. Table 7 shows that BSM
outperforms the zero-shot baseline for ‘Reasoning’
questions, even in reference-free evaluations (i.e.,
GPT-4 generated answers are not used either in the
baseline or in BSM).


**Combining BSM and SC reduces position bias**
**further.** BSM generates a single solution for each
sub-problem (each branch). A possible enhancement is combining BSM with self-consistency i.e.,
sampling multiple solutions for each sub-problem.
In particular, we implement BSM+SC by sampling
five evaluations per branch (with temperature 0 _._ 7 )
and then the score for each sub-evaluation in that

branch is given by the average score. We compare
BSM with BSM+SC in Table 8. While agreement
scores do not improve further, we observe a 2%


Overall Turn-1 Turn-2


Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


BSM 0.55 17.33 39.09 0.60 14.66 39.46 0.50 20.00 39.13

BSM + SC 0.55 15.33 39.09 0.61 10.66 39.06 0.49 20.00 39.13


Table 8: Effect of using Self-Consistency within each branch of B RANCH -S OLVE -M ERGE (BSM+SC). Results are
with the LLaMA-2-70B-chat model. While the overall agreement scores do not improve further, we obtain a further
2% reduction in position bias.



Overall Turn 1 Turn 2


Vicuna-33B 0.52 0.53 0.51
BSM (w/ Vicuna-33B) **0.55** **0.56** **0.54**


LLaMA-2-70B 0.48 0.58 0.37
BSM (w/ LLaMA-2-70B) **0.53** **0.59** **0.47**


GPT-4 0.61 0.59 **0.63**
BSM (w/ GPT-4) **0.63** **0.63** 0.62


Table 9: LLM-Human agreement scores for the ‘writing’ category questions (overall and individually for
turn-1 and turn-2). Here agreement is computed using
majority voting (instead of treating each human vote per
sample independently).


reduction in position bias. This points to two conclusions. First, BSM, through its decomposition
approach, already constructs sub-problems that are
granular enough and hence, the variance reduction
that one obtains through self-consistency within
each sub-problem is limited. However, the moderate reduction in position bias still reflects its usefulness, which is a direct effect of making evaluations
more consistent.


**Effect of Branching Factor.** BSM has the benefit of relying on the underlying LLM for deciding
what sub-problems to branch to, while the prompt
controls the maximum branching factor (see the
phrase ‘list of up to five factors’ in the branch
prompt in Fig. 4). We vary this maximum branching factor from 2 to 5 and study its effect on 100
samples from the ‘writing’ category of questions.
Table 10 reports our findings. We observe highest
agreement at a branching factor of 4, after which
the result mostly saturates. In general, the optimal branching factor should depend on the specific
question under consideration and unlike past work
where users specify what factors to evaluate on (Liu
et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023), BSM generates
that plan on its own. Position bias continues to
decrease with increasing branching factor, where
more branches helps reduce variance in the final
judgment.



**BSM is robust to evaluation scale.** Evaluation

tasks, in general, require defining a scale for scoring the responses. In Table 11, we compare the
performance of BSM by varying this evaluation
scale, specified in the ‘solve’ prompt (see Fig 5),
either scoring 1-5 (used in the main experiments) or
1-10. We observe that BSM is fairly robust to such
variations, obtaining comparable agreement scores.
The position bias, however, increases slightly with
a larger scale.


**B** **Additional Experiments: Constrained**
**Text Generation**


**Analysis of Missing Concepts in BSM.** The
source of missing concepts in BSM can be attributed to one of the following two categories:
(a) the ‘solve’ module, i.e., the model omits concepts even when generating an intermediate story
in a branch subproblem with a lesser number of
concepts; or (b) the ‘merge’ module, i.e., the intermediate stories include their respective concepts
but the fusion process omits some of these. We
observe that out of 72% of the BSM stories (with
LLaMA-2-70B-chat) where at least one concept is
missing, a significant 60% of these belong to the
first category (i.e., concept omission in the ‘solve’
module) versus only 12% belong to the second category (i.e., concept omission during ‘merging’).
This suggests that constraint satisfaction can be
further improved via a ‘recursive’ BSM method
involving iterative branching to even more granular
sub-problems. However, recursive BSM would be
significantly more expensive because of many more
calls to the base LLM. We leave this exploration as
part of future work.


Overall Turn-1 Turn-2


BF Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


2 0.50 22.00 49.20 0.49 24.00 45.00 0.50 22.00 56.52

3 0.52 19.00 38.09 0.53 14.00 35.00 0.51 24.00 43.47

4 **0.53** 19.00 38.09 0.51 16.00 35.00 0.55 22.00 43.47

5 0.52 **12.00** **34.92** 0.51 12.00 35.00 0.54 12.00 34.78


Table 10: Impact of maximum Branching Factor (BF) on 100 samples of the ‘writing’ category in LLM response
evaluation with BSM on LLaMA-2-70B-chat.


Overall Turn-1 Turn-2
Solving Technique

Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_ Ag _↑_ PB _↓_ LB _↓_


Eval Scale (1-5) 0.52 12.00 34.92 0.51 12.00 35.00 0.54 12.00 34.78
Eval Scale (1-10) 0.50 18.00 36.50 0.51 18.00 40.00 0.50 18.00 30.43


Table 11: Analysis of evaluation scale for LLM response evaluation, with 100 samples of ‘writing’ category. BSM
(with LLaMA-2-70B-chat) is fairly robust to such variations.









































Figure 2: Examples of LLM Evaluation branch generation. We show different branches (evaluation plans) generated
by BSM with a LLaMA-2-70B-chat model for different kinds of questions: (top) a turn-2 writing question and
(bottom) a coding question.


Figure 3: An illustration of BSM with LLaMA-2-70B-chat for constrained story generation. Given a set of random
concepts, the ‘Branch’ module first divides them into two sets and generates a story topic. The ‘Solve’ module
conditions on the concepts and the topic to generate an intermediate story for each branch. The ‘Merge’ module
merges the intermediate stories to generate a final story ensuring that all concepts are still present.


**Algorithm 1** B RANCH -S OLVE -M ERGE : LLM Program for LLM Evaluation


**Require:** Question _q_, LLM Responses { _r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _}_, Modules _m_ = {branch( _·_ ),solve( _·_ ),merge( _·_ )}

**function** BSM( _q, r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _, m, swap_ )

_C ←_ branch( _q_ ) _▷_ Branch to different evaluation criteria.
**for each** _c_ _i_ _∈_ _C_ **do**

**if** _swap_ = _False_ **then**

_s_ _i_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, s_ [(] _i_ _[B]_ [)] _←_ solve( _q, r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _, c_ _i_ ) _▷_ Solve for each of the criteria.
**else**

_s_ [(] _i_ _[A]_ [)] _, s_ [(] _i_ _[B]_ [)] _←_ solve( _q, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, c_ _i_ )
**end if**

**end for**
_y_ [(] _[A,B]_ [)] _←_ merge( _q, {c_ _i_ _}_ _i_ _[k]_ =1 _[,][ {][s]_ [(] _i_ _[A]_ [)] _}_ _i_ _[k]_ =1 _[,][ {][s]_ [(] _i_ _[B]_ [)] _}_ _i_ _[k]_ =1 [)] _▷_ Merge the individual evaluations.
**return** _y_ [(] _[A,B]_ [)]

**end function**
**function** B RANCH -S OLVE -M ERGE ( _q, r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _, m_ )

_y_ [(] _[A,B]_ [)] = BSM( _q, r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _, m, swap_ = _False_ ) _▷_ Get verdict by not swapping the response order.
_y_ [(] _[B,A]_ [)] = BSM( _q, r_ [(] _[A]_ [)] _, r_ [(] _[B]_ [)] _, m, swap_ = _True_ ) _▷_ Get verdict by swapping the response order.
**if** _y_ [(] _[A,B]_ [)] = _A_ & _y_ [(] _[B,A]_ [)] = _B_ **then**

_y ←_ _A_ _▷_ Choose a response only if the individual evaluations are consistent.
**else if** _y_ [(] _[A,B]_ [)] = _B_ & _y_ [(] _[B,A]_ [)] = _A_ **then**

_y ←_ _B_
**else**


_y ←_ _tie_
**end if**

**return** _y_
**end function**


Figure 4: Branch prompts for Turn-1 and Turn-2 questions for the task of LLM Response Evaluation. The Turn-1
prompt conditions only on the Turn-1 question while the Turn-2 prompt conditions on both turn questions to
generate an evaluation plan.


Figure 5: Solve prompts for Turn-1 and Turn-2 questions for the task of LLM Response Evaluation. Each prompt
conditions on the question(s), the responses from both LLMs, and a given evaluation criterion that the branch
module has generated.


Figure 6: Branch, Solve, and Merge prompts for the task of Constrained Story Generation. The branch prompt
conditions on the concepts. The solve prompt conditions on a subset of concepts and a story topic that the branch
module has generated. The merge prompt conditions on the two intermediate stories that the solve module has
generated and their respective concept-sets.









Figure 7: Prompt for evaluating the quality of the stories with GPT-4. It asks the model to perform a pair-wise
evaluation between the stories generated by the baseline method and by BSM.


