## **CheckEval: A reliable LLM-as-a-Judge framework** **for evaluating text generation using checklists**

**Yukyung Lee** **[1]** **Joonghoon Kim** **[2]** **Jaehee Kim** **[3,#]** **Hyowon Cho** **[4,#]** **Jaewook Kang** **[5]**

**Pilsung Kang** **[3,]** _[†]_ **Najoung Kim** **[1,]** _[†]_


1 Boston University 2 SK Telecom 3 Seoul National University 4 KAIST 5 NAVER
[ylee5@bu.edu](mailto:ylee5@bu.edu) [pilsung_kang@snu.ac.kr](mailto:pilsung_kang@snu.ac.kr) [najoung@bu.edu](mailto:najoung@bu.edu)



**Abstract**


Existing LLM-as-a-Judge approaches for evaluating text generation suffer from rating inconsistencies, with low agreement and high rating
variance across different evaluator models. We

attribute this to subjective evaluation criteria
combined with Likert scale scoring in existing protocols. To address this issue, we introduce CheckEval, a checklist-based evaluation
framework that improves rating reliability via
decomposed binary questions. Through experiments with 12 evaluator models across multi
ple datasets, we first demonstrate that CheckEval strongly correlates with human judgments.
More importantly, CheckEval dramatically improves the average agreement across evaluator models by 0.45 and reduces the score variance. CheckEval scores furthermore have the

benefit of being more interpretable because it
decomposes evaluation criteria into traceable
binary decisions, allowing analyses of specific
attributes driving quality judgments.


**1** **Introduction**


Evaluating text generation quality remains a major
challenge in Natural Language Generation (NLG),
particularly as Large Language Models (LLMs)
continue to advance in their generative capabilities (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
Achiam et al., 2023). This is especially evident
in tasks such as summarization, dialogue, and creative writing (Liu et al., 2023d; Kim et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023a), where qualitative dimensions
of the output are crucial yet difficult to measure
systematically. Consequently, there is growing interest in developing evaluation methods that can
effectively capture these aspects. These methods
will ideally involve well-defined protocols that ensure reliability across different raters and tasks. In
obtaining actual scores from such protocols, human evaluation remains the gold standard, but it


#    , Equal contribution. Our code is available at [https:](https://github.com/yukyunglee/CheckEval)
[//github.com/yukyunglee/CheckEval.](https://github.com/yukyunglee/CheckEval)



is costly, time-consuming, and difficult to scale
(Novikova et al., 2017; Belz et al., 2020). While
lexical overlap-based metrics such as ROUGE and
BLEU (Lin, 2004; Papineni et al., 2002) have been
widely adopted for ease of automation, they align
poorly with human judgments, calling for alternatives that better approximate human evaluation.

Recent work has explored the use of LLM-as-aJudge as a scalable alternative, leveraging LLMs to
assess generated text directly (Zheng et al., 2023).
This paradigm has evolved through various approaches: single-turn prompting (Liu et al., 2023b;
Fu et al., 2023), meta-evaluator training (Kim et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2024b), and even more sophisticated methods like multi-agent debate (Chan et al.,
2024; Kim et al., 2024). However, these methods
often rely on subjective evaluation protocols that
require evaluators to assign holistic scores without
clear decision criteria. For example, evaluators are
typically asked to rate text on a Likert scale from
1 to 5 (higher is better) on dimensions such as coherence, consistency, fluency, and relevance. While
Likert scales are useful for capturing ordinal relationships in human evaluation, they face two key
challenges when applied to LLM-based evaluator
models. First, current LLMs are known to struggle
with subjective criteria in Likert-scale evaluations,
in particular showing difficulty in differentiating
between high-quality texts (Li et al., 2019; Stureborg et al., 2024). Second, evaluation results are
highly sensitive to the choice of evaluator models. These lead to low _inter-evaluator agreement_
(IEA), [1] which we define as the agreement among
evaluator models (of similar capacity), as well as
high variance in evaluation results (Stureborg et al.,
2024). Yet, previous LLM-as-a-Judge approaches


1 This is equivalent to Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) in
human evaluation (Artstein, 2017), but we use the term IEA in
this paper to make it clear that the agreement we are aiming to
improve is agreement between evaluator models, rather than
between human raters providing the gold evaluation.


have overlooked these issues (Gao et al., 2024a).
To address these challenges, we introduce
**CheckEval**, a reliable evaluation framework that
decomposes evaluation criteria to target finegrained qualitative dimensions and turns them into
a checklist. [2] Inspired by recent advances in finegrained decomposition of evaluation (Liu et al.,
2023c; Min et al., 2023), our framework breaks
down evaluation into discrete Boolean questions.
This decomposition simplifies each individual evaluation question and clarifies the rationale behind
evaluation decisions. CheckEval addresses key limitations of existing methods in two ways. First,
it improves explainability by tracking how specific criteria are met, making evaluation decisions
more explicit and reducing ambiguity. Second, it
enhances consistency through structured binary responses, which improve IEA and reduce variability.
Importantly, CheckEval maintains competitive correlation with human evaluation while achieving
these improvements. These improvements are verified through comprehensive experiments across 12
different LLM-based evaluator models of varying
sizes, including both open and closed-source models, on multiple datasets. The main contributions
of this study can be summarized as follows:


  - We introduce CheckEval, a fine-grained evaluation framework leveraging a Boolean QA
checklist to address the rating consistency issues with existing LLM-as-a-Judge methods
for NLG evaluation.


  - Experiments across 12 LLMs and multiple datasets demonstrate significant improvements in correlation with human evaluation

compared to Likert-based approaches like GEval (Liu et al., 2023b) and SEEval (Wu et al.,
2025).


  - CheckEval shows reduced sensitivity to the
choice of evaluator models, leading to more
consistent evaluation results with lower vari
ance and higher IEA.


**2** **Related Work**


**2.1** **LLM-as-a-Judge**


Traditional NLG evaluation metrics like ROUGE

and BLEU show clear limitations due to their

reliance on reference texts (Gu et al., 2021).


2 Our checklist concept is inspired by Ribeiro et al. (2020),
who proposed checklist-based testing for NLP models.



With advances in LLMs, researchers have explored LLM-as-a-Judge, where an LLM evaluates texts based on specified criteria, formalized
as _F_ (subject _,_ criteria) _→_ result (Li et al., 2024).
LLM-as-a-Judge can be categorized into pairwise
and pointwise evaluation approaches (Gu et al.,
2024). Pairwise evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023; Qin
et al., 2024) compares two outputs to determine
relative preference but is computationally expensive as comparisons scale exponentially. In contrast,
pointwise evaluation (Liu et al., 2023b; Fu et al.,
2023) assigns scores to individual outputs, allowing
for absolute scaling. However, existing pointwise
evaluation protocols often lack granularity, assigning a single numeric score to each dimension of
evaluation. If the specified dimensions of evaluation are too broad (e.g., fluency ), this may lead
to inconsistencies in judgments because many factors could influence the quality along the target
dimension. CheckEval falls in to the category of
pointwise evaluation but addresses its limitations
by adopting a finer-grained Boolean QA Checklist. [3]


**2.2** **Decompositional Approaches**


Decomposing complex information into minimal
units to simplify tasks have been explored in various areas of NLP (Kamoi et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2022; Wright et al., 2022; Krishna et al., 2023;
Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004; Liu et al., 2024).
Recent studies have shown that breaking down content into atomic units reduces subjectivity in factual consistency judgment (Liu et al., 2023c; Min
et al., 2023). Atomic units represent elementary information that cannot be further divided. Similarly,
CheckEval decomposes evaluation criteria into finegrained Boolean QA Checklists to enhance clarity
and reduce ambiguity in the evaluation process.


**2.3** **Reliability of Evaluation**


Reliability is an important yet often overlooked
component of evaluation. Many LLM-as-a-Judge
methods focus only on correlation with human
scores, often neglecting consistency and stability across different LLMs. Recent studies have
highlighted several reliability concerns. Xiao et al.


3 Recent studies (Wu et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024) use
LLM-as-a-Judge as a reward signal in alignment training with
RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, this approach primarily
aims to optimize model training rather than enhance evaluation
robustness and explainability. Our work focuses on improving
evaluation frameworks, and integrating evaluation signals into
model training is beyond our scope.


Figure 1: Overall process of CheckEval. CheckEval consists of three stages: (1) Defining Dimensions of Evaluation,
where humans select specific dimensions and define sub-dimensions; (2) Checklist Generation, which incorporates
two augmentation methods—question diversification (green) and elaboration (blue); and (3) Checklist-based
Evaluation, where the model responds to the checklist with yes/no answers.



(2023) demonstrate that LLMs fail to reliably assess subtle quality differences in text. Similarly,
Bavaresco et al. (2024) find these models often
assign highly variable ratings to identical inputs.
Furthermore, IEA remains low across models, compromising evaluation reliability (Stureborg et al.,
2024). Our work addresses these issues by evaluating not only correlation but also IEA and score variance across evaluator models, showing that CheckEval improves reliability across diverse LLMs.


**3** **Method**


CheckEval consists of three stages, (1) Defining Dimensions of Evaluation, (2) Checklist Generation,
and (3) Checklist-Based Evaluation, as shown in
Figure 1. The framework translates high-level evaluation criteria into a Boolean QA checklist, each
question in the checklist expecting a binary (yes/no)
response. This format improves clarity and alleviates ambiguity compared to Likert-scale scoring
(discussed further in Section 7.2).


**3.1** **Defining Dimensions of Evaluation**


The first stage defines the dimensions of text quality
(e.g., consistency, fluency ) to be evaluated by
either adopting predefined dimensions from benchmarks or specifying custom dimensions for the task.
For each dimension, we then define sub-dimensions
that break down the high-level dimensions further
into distinct and detailed components. The subdimensions are grounded in the original definitions



of the dimensions from benchmark datasets and

can also also informed by related work (Liu et al.,
2023c; Laban et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2019). For
instance, the original SummEval paper proposes
that fluency in summarization should include
sub-dimensions such as formatting, grammar,
completeness, and readability.

Sub-dimensions must be carefully designed to
align with benchmark definitions and to prevent
inconsistencies with the intended evaluation cri
teria. While LLMs can be used to automate the

generation of sub-dimensions and questions, we
found that fully relying on them often led to misalignment with the criteria defined by the benchmark (e.g., conflating coherence and fluency ).
This leads to evaluation that is not grounded in
the benchmark design, potentially producing incorrect assessments. To address this, we only allowed
human-selected sub-dimensions in our work, following prior work that recommends human oversight as an effective way to maintain alignment
with benchmark objectives (Szymanski et al., 2024;
Pan et al., 2024).


**3.2** **Checklist Generation**


**Seed Question Writing** We create Boolean questions that correspond to the sub-dimensions defined
in the first step. Each question requires a ‘yes’ or
‘no’ answer, where ‘yes’ indicates adherence to
the evaluation criterion corresponding to the target
sub-dimension. This binary format simplifies the


judgment process, ensuring that evaluation criteria are explicitly defined and consistently applied
(Laban et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023c). This format
also helps LLMs generate more reliable responses
by constraining the answer space, minimizing response variability and reducing ambiguity. For example, the question _“Are all words in the sentence_
_spelled correctly?”_ elicits a clearer and more direct
response than a more open-ended alternative like
_“How well does the sentence adhere to or deviate_

_from standard grammar rules?”_ .


**Question Augmentation** Manually designing a
comprehensive set of evaluation questions would
be ideal for ensuring a high-quality checklist. However, this approach faces scalability limitations,
making it impractical to generate a sufficiently
large and diverse set of questions for evaluation.
This challenge becomes even more significant
when extending to individual application scenarios, each requiring its own comprehensive set of
questions. To this end, we expand the seed questions using LLMs, enhancing both the diversity
and granularity of evaluation. Augmentation enables broader coverage while refining questions to
capture a wider range of lexical and semantic variations. This process follows two strategies, each
extending the coverage of seed questions. (1) _Ques-_
_tion Diversification_ expands evaluation diversity
by introducing variations that explore different perspectives of sub-dimensions and contexts of the
seed question. (2) _Question Elaboration_ increases
granularity by expanding the seed questions into
more specific and detailed questions. To ensure that
the augmented questions remain grounded in the
seed questions, Question Diversification and Elaboration are performed independently rather than
sequentially. For example, the seed question _“Are_
_all words in the sentence spelled correctly?”_ can
be expanded into _“Are all sentences complete, with_
_no fragments or missing components?”_ (diversification) or specified into _“Are proper nouns (names_
_of people, places, etc.) spelled correctly?”_ (elaboration).


**Question Filtering** LLM-based augmentation expands the question set, but it can also generate
questions that do not fully align with the intended
evaluation criteria. Some questions may reflect misinterpretations of dimension definitions or add unnecessary redundancy, which can affect evaluation
reliability. To filter out such questions, we apply
an LLM-based minimal filtering process that evalu


ates a combined pool of seed and augmented questions for each dimension. This filtering step applies
three main criteria for retaining relevant questions:
(1) _alignment_, verifying that a ‘yes’ response to
the question indicates higher quality; (2) _dimen-_
_sion consistency_, confirming that the question adheres to the original definition of the evaluation
dimension; and (3) _redundancy removal_, eliminating semantically overlapping questions to avoid
unnecessary repetition. While there is no direct
metric to measure filtering effectiveness, we observe improved correlation with human judgments
after filtering, suggesting that the filtering is functioning as intended. We further validated the quality
of the checklist via a human study, where annotators scored the augmented and filtered questions
(Section 6.1).


**3.3** **Checklist-based Evaluation**


In the final stage, LLMs evaluate the target text
using the completed checklist (see Table 17 and 18
for the number of checklist questions and Table 26
and 27 for the dimensions, sub-dimensions, and corresponding seed question for each dataset). To improve efficiency, we ask multiple questions simultaneously rather than asking each question separately.
We compared single-question and multi-question
inference in our pilot experiments and found no
noticeable difference in performance. Therefore,
we evaluated multiple questions together to reduce
the computational cost. The questions are grouped
by sub-dimensions, ensuring that related questions
are presented together to aid model comprehension. For each question in the checklist, the LLM
generates a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ response. The final quality score is computed as the proportion of ‘yes’
responses among all questions (e.g., 15 ‘yes’ out
of 20 questions yields 0.75). We note that the final score is computed by uniformly weighting the
checklist questions: each ‘yes’ response contributes
equally to the final score. We discuss an alternative
weighting strategy in Appendix C.2. More implementation details about the evaluation process are
described in Section 4.4.

This approach enhances explainability by explicitly tracking how specific criteria are met, making evaluation decisions more interpretable without
requiring additional rationale generation. Unlike
existing LLM-as-a-Judge approaches such as GEval and SEEval (our main comparison points)
that generate numerical scores without explanation
(e.g., _“Based on the conversation history, the cor-_


_responding context, and the response, here is the_
_evaluation: ‘Naturalness’: 2”_ ), the reasoning behind the evaluation score is easily traceable from
the checklist responses.


**4** **Experimental Setup**


**4.1** **Datasets and Metrics**


Following Liu et al. (2023b), We use three
meta-evaluation benchmarks spanning various
tasks to measure the effectiveness of CheckE
val. **SummEval** (Fabbri et al., 2021) is a benchmark designed for the meta-evaluation of summarization. SummEval includes human evalua
tions for each generated summary across four
dimensions: coherence, consistency, fluency,
and relevance . **Topical-Chat** (Gopalakrishnan
et al., 2019) is a benchmark for meta-evaluating
evaluation methods for knowledge-grounded dialogue systems. Following Zhong et al. (2022),
we evaluate our method using human ratings
across four dimensions: naturalness, coherence,
engagingness, and groundedness . **QAGS** (Wang
et al., 2020) is another widely used benchmark, but
since it focuses solely on factual consistency in
summarization, we only report the results in Appendix B.1. We report Pearson’s _r_, Spearman’s _ρ_,
Kendall’s _τ_ on each benchmark. For SummEval,
correlations are calculated at the sample-level (per
summary), while for Topical-Chat, they are calculated at the turn-level (per conversational response).


**4.2** **Baselines**


We selected **G-Eval** (Liu et al., 2023b) and **SEE-**
**val** (Wu et al., 2025) as our main baselines. GEval adopts chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al.,
2022) and a form-filling paradigm to generate evaluation scores on a Likert scale. We selected it

based on three factors: (1) its widespread adoption as a representative baseline in LLM-as-ajudge research, (2) the availability of publicly released prompts that facilitate reproducibility, and
(3) its relatively simple setup that avoids confounding performance-enhancing techniques—such as
prompt optimization (e.g., self-correction), training meta-evaluators, preference learning, or multiagent frameworks. SEEval follows a similar Likertstyle scoring procedure to G-Eval but augments it
with a self-explanation step, prompting the model
to generate brief justifications before producing its
rating. This strategy is intended to improve evaluation quality without additional training.



Like G-Eval and SEEval, CheckEval is also designed to rely solely on a binary checklist mechanism, without introducing additional optimization
techniques beyond standard prompting. Although
they are not apples-to-apples comparisons, we also
include comparisons to several strong methods surveyed in Gu et al. (2024) and Gao et al. (2024b),
showing that CheckEval remains competitive even
in light of more recent developments. Further details on the baseline implementations are provided
in Appendix A.1.


**4.3** **Models**


We test both open-source models of varying sizes
and closed-source GPT models as evaluators. The
models included in each category are as follows: [4]

(1) **Large models** (70–123B): LLama3.1-70B,
Mistral-Large (123B), Qwen2.5-72B . (2)
**Medium** **models** (22–32B): Mistral-Small
(22B), Gemma2-27B, Qwen2.5-32B . (3) **Small**
**models** (7–9B): LLama3.1-8B, Gemma2-9B,
Qwen2.5-7B, (4) **GPT models** : GPT-4-Turbo,
GPT-4o, GPT-4o-mini (Achiam et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2024; Riviere et al., 2024).


**4.4** **Implementation Details**


Following prior work (Liu et al., 2023b), we set
temperature = 0, n = 1, and fix the random seed
for both G-Eval, SEEval and CheckEval. Additionally, We set max_length to 20 for G-Eval as it generates a single score, 500 for SEEval following the
original implementation and 200 for CheckEval as
it needs to generate responses to multiple checklist
questions. We used the original prompts provided
by the authors of G-Eval and SEEval without any
modifications. Example prompts for CheckEval are
provided in the Appendix F. We evaluated multiple
questions in the checklist within a single prompt
to enhance efficiency and practicality rather than
evaluating each question individually, as discussed
in Section 3.3.

We used GPT-4o for both the question augmentation and filtering steps in the checklist generation
stage. The total number of generated questions at
each step is provided in Appendix D. Our experiments on open-weight models were conducted using vLLM 0.6.3 (Kwon et al., 2023) with four A100
GPUs (or eight A6000 GPUs). The API cost to
evaluate the 1,600 SummEval samples was approx

4 The links for each model are provided in Appendix E.


**Model** **Evaluation** **SummEval (Avg.)** **Topical-Chat (Avg.)**
**Methods** _ρ_ _τ_ _ρ_ _r_


_**non-LLM-as-a-Judge**_


ROUGE-L 0.17 0.13 0.24 0.24

BERTScore 0.23 0.18 0.25 0.24

MOVERScore 0.47 0.38 0.22 0.24

BARTScore 0.19 0.15 0.29 0.29

UniEval 0.39 0.31 0.28 0.26


_**LLM-as-a-Judge**_


Table 1: Average correlation scores across dimensions
on the benchmarks. For SummEval, we report samplelevel _ρ_ and _τ_ . For Topical-Chat, we report turn-level
_ρ_ and _r_ . Colors indicate model groups: large (pink),
medium (blue), small (green) and GPT (purple). The
best score per model category is bolded, and the highest
overall score is marked with an underline.


imately $66 with GPT-4 Turbo, $22 with GPT-4o,
and $1.30 with GPT-4o-mini.


**5** **Results**


**5.1** **Correlation with Human Evaluation**


Table 1 shows the correlation between various eval
uation methods and human judgments on the SummEval and Topical-Chat datasets (detailed correlation results for all dimensions are shown in Ta
ble 22, 24 and 7 in the Appendix). We compare both
non-LLM-as-a-Judge and LLM-as-a-Judge methods, with an emphasis on how CheckEval compares
against G-Eval and SEEval across 12 LLMs.
Excluding MOVERScore, most non-LLM-as-a


G-Eval 0.09 0.19 0.06 0.34
All
SEEval 0.08 0.14 0.07 0.31

CheckEval **0.48** **0.48** **0.45** **0.45**


G-Eval 0.05 0.16 0.01 0.51
Large
SEEval 0.06 0.19 0.55 0.61

CheckEval **0.67** **0.67** **0.67** **0.67**


G-Eval 0.04 0.14 0.07 0.22
Medium
SEEval 0.09 0.13 0.06 0.34

CheckEval **0.56** **0.56** **0.50** **0.50**


G-Eval 0.06 0.10 0.04 0.16
Small
SEEval 0.02 0.07 0.16 0.15

CheckEval **0.24** **0.24** **0.17** **0.17**


G-Eval 0.08 0.20 0.04 0.50
GPT
SEEval 0.13 0.32 0.12 0.51

CheckEval **0.56** **0.56** **0.54** **0.54**


G-Eval 0.07 0.23 0.03 0.56
Top-3 _[∗]_
SEEval 0.09 0.19 0.06 0.34

CheckEval **0.65** **0.65** **0.57** **0.57**


Table 2: Inter-evaluator agreement (IEA) results for
SummEval and Topical-Chat, comparing G-Eval, SEEval and CheckEval across different model groups. Top-3
refers to the three models with the highest correlation
to human judgments ( _[∗]_ see Appendix A.3 for the list
of top-3 models for each evaluation method). The best
score per model category is bolded.


Judge metrics exhibit very low correlation with
humans. Among LLM-as-a-Judge methods, CheckEval consistently achieves higher correlation with
human judgments than G-Eval and SEEval, with
only a few exceptions of Qwen2.5 and MistralSmall. These results suggest that CheckEval’s finegrained, checklist-based design more effectively
captures subtle differences in text quality, leading
to improved correlation with human judgments.
When analyzing model sizes, large open-source
models show strong performance, with MistralLarge combined with CheckEval achieving the
highest correlation among all models ( _ρ_ = 0 _._ 55 on
SummEval and _r_ = 0 _._ 65 on Topical-Chat). Even
in medium- and small-sized models—where eval
uation capacity tends to be weaker—CheckEval
maintains its advantage over G-Eval. Notably, some
medium-sized models perform particularly well on
SummEval, achieving correlations comparable to
larger models. For GPT models, CheckEval consistently yields stronger correlations than G-Eval and
SEEval, particularly with GPT-4o.


**5.2** **Inter-evaluator Agreement (IEA)**


Table 2 compares the IEA of G-Eval, SEEval and
CheckEval on the SummEval and Topical-Chat
datasets. We measure IEA using Krippendorff’s



**Model** **Evaluation** **SummEval (Avg.)** **Topical-Chat (Avg.)**
**Group** **Methods**

_α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_


percentage for filtered questions.


_α_ and Fleiss’ _κ_, treating different LLMs within the
same group (large, medium, small, GPT) as annotators. While correlation with human judgments is a
main metric in LLM-as-a-Judge, **high correlation**
**alone does not guarantee reliability** . Reliability
is a desirable property for evaluation methods, as it
ensures that different evaluator models (of similar
capacity) assign similar scores/rating to the same
input. This reliability is critical yet overlooked in
existing frameworks.

Both G-Eval and SEEval demonstrate this lim
itation. They achieve fairly good correlation with
human judgments but show much lower IEA in
general. Table 2 shows a clear gap between the
IEA of G-Eval and SEEval and IEA of CheckE
val, particularly for the Large and Top-3 models.
This indicates inconsistent scoring across different
LLM evaluator models of similar capacity. We speculate that existing protocols like G-Eval’s mainly
lend themselves to inconsistencies in the following
two ways: (1) the evaluation dimensions adopted
encompass multiple distinct fine-grained criteria,
making it difficult for LLMs to generate a consistent holistic score, and (2) adjacent Likert scale
scores lack clear distinctions (e.g., 3 vs. 4) and
are not calibrated well across models (Laban et al.,
2023).

CheckEval’s fine-grained checklist approach improves upon this limitation greatly. For the large
models, CheckEval achieves best IEA scores of
0.67 ( _α_ and _κ_ ), on SummEval, which is comparable to IEA among human raters ( _κ ≈_ 0 _._ 7 ) (Fabbri
et al., 2021), and 0.67 ( _α_ and _κ_ ) on Topical-Chat.
Crucially, CheckEval maintains both high correlation and IEA across different LLMs and tasks.

These results demonstrate that CheckEval provides
a more reliable evaluation than G-Eval and SEEval



**Model** **Evaluation** **SummEval (Avg.)**

**Method**

_ρ_ _τ_


**Mistral-Large** CheckEval 0.5486 0.4797
**CheckEval** [#] 0.5486 0.4797


**Topical-Chat (Avg.)**


_ρ_ _r_


CheckEval 0.6451 0.6453

**CheckEval** [#] 0.6443 0.6412


**QAGS (Avg.)**


_r_ _ρ_


CheckEval 0.6681 0.6558

**CheckEval** [#] 0.6680 0.6558


Table 3: Effect of applying additional human filtering to
Mistral-Large. # indicates that filtering was applied.


(See Table 23 and 25 for a detailed per-dimension
IEA). We furthermore show that this improvement
in IEA is not solely due to the format of the output
(Likert vs. binary) in Appendix C.3.


**6** **Human Validation**


We conducted two distinct human evaluation stud
ies to validate our approach: (1) an assessment of
our automated checklist generation process, and
(2) a direct comparison between LLM and human
scores using the CheckEval protocol.


**6.1** **Validation of Checklist Generation**

**Process**


To verify that each stage of the checklist generation process worked as intended, we conducted an
additional human evaluation focused on checklist

quality. This evaluation validates the augmentation
stage (seed questions, augmented questions), and
filtering stage (seed questions, filtered questions)
on both the SummEval and Topical-Chat datasets.
Human evaluators are tasked with assessing each
question on a binary (yes/no) basis, determining
whether it satisfies the augmentation and filtering
criteria. Figure 2 shows the average scores derived
from the checklist validation evaluation for both

the SummEval and Topical-Chat datasets. The augmentation stage consistently achieves very high
average scores across both datasets (above 90%),
which suggests that the question augmentation process of CheckEval is highly effective. The filtering stage yields slightly lower scores but remains
competitive. We observed that annotators often expected 1–2 additional questions per dimensions to


_**Correlation**_ _ρ_ _τ_


**Mistral-large** (C) vs. Humans (C) 0.73 _[∗∗]_ 0.58 _[∗∗]_

**Qwen2.5-72B** (C) vs. Humans (C) 0.72 _[∗∗]_ 0.59 _[∗∗∗]_

**Llama3.1-70B** (C) vs. Humans (C) 0.73 _[∗∗]_ 0.58 _[∗∗]_

Humans (L) vs. Humans (C) 0.69 ~~_[∗∗]_~~ 0.54 ~~_[∗∗∗]_~~


_**Agreement**_ _(dim: Relevance)_ # Annotators _κ_


Humans 3 0.53

LLMs (Large) & Humans 6 0.49


Table 4: Human validation of the CheckEval protocol
on SummEval. **C** denotes CheckEval, **L** denotes Likert
(original SummEval Score). We use the LLM results
from the large model group. ( _[∗∗]_ : _p < ._ 01, _[∗∗∗]_ : _p < ._ 001 )


be filtered. Comments from annotators suggest that
these questions were mostly semantically overlapping questions that the filter failed to capture.
To test whether removing these remaining questions would affect evaluation results, we conducted
a follow-up experiment by applying an additional
human-curated filtering step. We used MistralLarge, the best-performing model, for this experiment. As shown in As shown in Table 3, the correlation scores after applying the additional filtering
were extremely similar to the original results, with
only minor drops. This indicates that removing one
or two additional questions per evaluation dimension does not meaningfully impact the evaluation
behavior, suggesting that CheckEval’s automatic
filtering is functioning effectively in practice.


**6.2** **Validation of CheckEval Protocol**


To further assess the validity of CheckEval protocol, we asked human annotators to manually apply
the same checklist. We then used these human
generated scores to perform two analyses: a correlation analysis against scores from LLMs, and
an inter-rater agreement analysis (Table 4). Details
of the human validation setup are provided in Appendix A.4.


**Correlation** We sampled 20 summaries from the
SummEval dataset. The random sampling was stratified based on original annotation scores to ensure
balanced coverage of a wide range of quality levels.
Three annotators evaluated each summary using the
checklist, which contains approximately 25 binary
(yes/no) questions per evaluation dimension. This
resulted in roughly 2,000 binary annotations per annotator. For each summary, we aggregated checklist
scores by summing the number of ‘yes’ responses
per dimension, following the same method used
for LLM outputs. We then computed correlation



Figure 3: Kernel density estimation (KDE) of correlations with human judgments for G-Eval (purple), SEEval (blue) and CheckEval (pink) across different evaluator models on SummEval and Topical-Chat. Dashed
lines indicate mean correlation values.


between these aggregated human scores and those
from three large LLMs: Mistral-Large, Qwen2.572B, and Llama3.1-70B. In addition, we calculated
correlation between the original Likert-scale scores
from SummEval and the checklist-based human

scores. All correlations are statistically significant,
indicating that CheckEval scores successfully capture human judgments.


**Agreement** Due to the high annotation cost, we
focused on relevance for agreement analysis. We
collected binary annotations on 100 summaries
(sample size selected based on a power analysis
targeting 95% confidence interval width of _≤_ 0.2
for IEA scores). Each annotator answered approximately 10,000 questions. We report inter-annotator
agreement among the three human annotators, as
well as agreement between the human group and
the large LLM group. We observe high agreement
between humans as well as between humans and

LLMs, showing that CheckEval elicits consistent
scores across both human and LLM raters.


**Conversation history (source)**


A: Hello, how are you today? Do you like to go to concerts?
B: Not as much as I used to, but I do.
A: Yeah, same here! Creed gave a concert so bad there were lawsuits against the band.

...

B: I have no idea. I’m sure that someone has video of it. Do you enjoy the music of the Foo Fighters?
A: Oh yes, I love them. I love the video of all the drummers and other instruments playing at the same
time. People came from all over the world to be in that.
B: They are pretty amazing. They performed a concert so loud that it showed up on New Zealand’s
seismic monitors!


**Context -** _In 2002, a Creed concert was so bad that four concertgoers filed a lawsuit against the band._


**System Response -** _I know, I think I have heard that before, I think it was really cool._


**Checklist**


**Questions** **Answer**


Does the response avoid unnecessary repetition of the same content between sentences? Yes
Does each sentence directly relate to the topic being discussed? No
Is the overall message clear and easy to understand? Yes
Does each sentence in the response convey a clear meaning? Yes
Is the tone consistent throughout? Yes
Does the response avoid using jargon or overly complex words that might confuse the Yes
listener?


Are there no major grammatical errors? Yes
Are there no ambiguous terms or phrases that could confuse the reader? Yes


**Raw Scores -** Human: **3** (1-3), G-Eval: **2** (1-5), CheckEval: **0.88** (0-1)


**Normalized Scores -** Human: **1** (0-1), G-Eval: **0.25** (0-1), CheckEval: **0.88** (0-1)


Table 5: Case study on the naturalness dimension in
the Topical-Chat.


**7** **Analysis**


**7.1** **Stability Analysis of Evaluation Methods**


We further analyze the stability of evaluation methods by examining the distribution of correlations
with human judgments across different evaluator
models. While the agreement metric (Section 5.2)
focuses on how consistently models assess the
same samples, stability evaluates whether an evaluation method maintains reliable alignment with
human annotations across all evaluator models.

As shown in Figure 3, CheckEval achieves higher
mean correlation and lower variance than G-Eval

and SEEval on both datasets, demonstrating more
stable evaluation across different models. Detailed

correlation statistics, including full mean and variance values, are available in Table 15.


**7.2** **Case Study**


We conduct a case study on the naturalness dimension in the Topical-Chat dataset to illustrate
how CheckEval enhances explainability by explicitly showing which evaluation criteria contribute to
the final score (see Table 5). We evaluate system
responses generated by Mistral-large, the model
with the strongest correlation with human judgments. For this case study, we normalize all scores
to a 0–1 scale for direct comparison. On evaluating the given text on naturalness, CheckEval (0.88)
aligns more closely with human judgments (1.0),
rating the response as natural. In contrast, G-Eval
(0.25) assigned a much lower naturalness score.
More importantly, while G-Eval provides only a
score without explanation, CheckEval’s systematic



**SummEval** **Topical-Chat**


CheckEval 0.48 0.55

w/o filtering 0.48 0.54
w/o augmentation 0.46 0.53


Table 6: Effect of filtering and augmentation components in CheckEval


decomposition into specific sub-questions helps
us attribute the high score to individual questions
with a ‘yes’ answer (e.g., the response is natural
because it avoids repetition, the message is clear,
etc.). An additional case study on low-quality samples from benchmark datasets is presented in Appendix C.1, further demonstrating how CheckEval
operates across a wider range of text qualities.


**7.3** **Ablation Study**


We conducted an ablation study to assess the contribution of each component in the CheckEval
pipeline. Table 6 reports results when removing
filtering and augmentation step. Both components
contribute to overall performance, with the augmentation stage showing a slightly larger impact. We
also explore whether the performance gap can be
closed by increasing the baseline inference budget
in Appendix C.4.


**8** **Conclusion**


We propose CheckEval, a fine-grained Boolean QA
Checklist framework that addresses key limitations
in existing LLM-as-Judge approaches for evaluating text generation. By decomposing evaluation
criteria into structured binary questions, CheckEval enables reliable evaluation of (open-ended)
text. Our experiments across various models and
datasets demonstrate that CheckEval outperforms
widely-adopted Likert scale-based methods like GEval, achieving higher correlation to human evaluation and IEA across different LLM evaluators. The

framework shows particular strength in evaluating
high-quality texts by effectively capturing subtle
qualitative differences while maintaining explainability. Additionally, CheckEval enhances evaluation stability through reduced variance across
LLMs. This shows that our framework offers a

promising solution for constructing more reliable
evaluation benchmarks across diverse NLG tasks.


**9** **Limitations**


CheckEval improves the reliability of LLM-as-aJudge evaluation, but it has several limitations.


First, while automating checklist generation is a
promising direction for improving scalability, it
introduces challenges that are common to many
automatic evaluation methods. CheckEval uses

task-specific, human-written seed questions, which
helps ground the evaluation in task-relevant criteria. However, as an automatic evaluation method,
there may be factors beyond our control that lead
to potential misalignment. In such cases, human
involvement may be necessary to ensure alignment
with task-specific goals. This is not a limitation
of CheckEval specifically, but a broader challenge
inherent to automatic evaluation approaches.
Second, this study focused on analyzing modelwise evaluation trends and comparing Likert-scale
evaluation with Boolean QA checklist-based evaluation. However, recent LLM-as-a-Judge studies
have introduced various techniques to enhance human alignment. Methods such as prompt optimization (e.g. chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022), selfcorrection (Xu et al., 2023)), multi-agent debate
(Chan et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024), and metaevaluator training (Kim et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2024b; Zhu et al., 2025) enable LLMs to make
more enhanced judgments. Therefore, future work
should compare it against these approaches and
analyze how it differs in terms of reliability. This
would also help determine whether CheckEval can
be combined with such techniques to build a more
robust evaluation framework.

Third, while CheckEval’s boolean-style decision
improves evaluation reliability, not all NLG tasks
and evaluation criteria can be strictly answered
with a yes/no response. This limitation becomes
more apparent when considering evaluation scenarios involving texts two to three times longer than
those in the current benchmarks. As text length
increases, some parts of a response may be strong
while others are weak. For example, the first half
of a response may be well-written and coherent,
while the latter half is unclear or contains errors.

This makes binary decisions insufficient for capturing subtle quality differences. The constraints
of a yes/no format may become more pronounced
in long-form evaluations, suggesting that future
research should explore ways to mitigate this limitation while preserving the strengths of CheckEval.
Fourth, CheckEval’s efficacy should be tested
on a wider range of NLG tasks. While this study
primarily focused on summarization and dialogue
response generation, additional experiments are
needed to validate CheckEval’s applicability to



tasks such as story generation, long-form question answering, machine translation, and dialogue
generation. Given that evaluation criteria vary by
domain, it is important to examine how well CheckEval generalizes across different task settings. We
note that generalizability of CheckEval is already
actively being tested in follow-up work: for instance CheckEval has been used for tasks such

as essay scoring (Chu et al., 2025), creative writing evaluation (Lee et al., 2024), and healthcare
evaluation (Mallinar et al., 2025).

Finally, improving the automation of checklist
design and evaluation processes would enhance
CheckEval’s usability. Currently, checklist construction is a manual process tailored to specific
tasks, making it difficult to predict the time and
effort required for new evaluation domains. One
potential solution is to pre-build a large-scale question database for NLG tasks and develop a system
that automatically assembles relevant checklists
based on task requirements. Future research should
explore LLM-assisted checklist generation and reconfiguration methods to ensure that CheckEval
can be efficiently applied to a broader range of
tasks.


**10** **Acknowledgments**


We thank Meng-Chen Wu for his help during the
rebuttal process. We also thank Jungsoo Park for
discussions that helped shape the initial idea of
CheckEval. Thanks to Soonwon Ka, Bokyung Son,
and Keonwoo Kim for their useful feedback in the

early stages of the project. We also appreciate the
valuable discussion and support from Yulu Qin, tinlab at BU, Naver AX unsupervised learning and
DSBA NLP group at KU & SNU. We acknowledge
that the computational work reported in this paper
was performed on the Shared Computing Cluster
[which is administered by Boston University’s Re-](https://www.bu.edu/tech/support/research/)
[search Computing Services. In addition, JK and](https://www.bu.edu/tech/support/research/)
PK were supported by Institute of Information &
Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2025-02214591, Development
of an Innovative AI Agent for Worker-Friendly Autonomous Manufacturing). Also, JK and PK were
supported by the BK21 FOUR Program (Education
and Research Center for Industrial Innovation Ana
lytics) funded by the Ministry of Education, Korea
(No. 4120240214912)


**References**


Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. _arXiv:2303.08774_ .


Ron Artstein. 2017. Inter-annotator agreement. _Hand-_
_book of linguistic annotation_, pages 297–313.


Anna Bavaresco, Raffaella Bernardi, Leonardo Bertolazzi, Desmond Elliott, Raquel Fernández, Albert
Gatt, Esam Ghaleb, Mario Giulianelli, Michael
Hanna, Alexander Koller, André F. T. Martins,
Philipp Mondorf, Vera Neplenbroek, Sandro Pezzelle,
Barbara Plank, David Schlangen, Alessandro Suglia, Aditya K. Surikuchi, Ece Takmaz, and Alberto
[Testoni. 2024. Llms instead of human judges? a large](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.18403)
[scale empirical study across 20 nlp evaluation tasks.](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.18403)
_CoRR_, abs/2406.18403.


Anya Belz, Simon Mille, and David M. Howcroft. 2020.

[Disentangling the properties of human evaluation](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.inlg-1.24)
[methods: A classification system to support compa-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.inlg-1.24)
[rability, meta-evaluation and reproducibility testing.](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.inlg-1.24)
In _Proceedings of the 13th International Conference_
_on Natural Language Generation_, pages 183–194,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. _Advances in neural information processing_
_systems_, 33:1877–1901.


Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu,
Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu.
[2024. Chateval: Towards better LLM-based eval-](https://openreview.net/forum?id=FQepisCUWu)
[uators through multi-agent debate. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=FQepisCUWu) _The Twelfth_
_International Conference on Learning Representa-_
_tions_ .


Jifan Chen, Aniruddh Sriram, Eunsol Choi, and
Greg Durrett. 2022. Generating literal and implied subquestions to fact-check complex claims.
_arXiv:2205.06938_ .


[Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. 2023. A closer](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.599)
[look into using large language models for automatic](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.599)
[evaluation. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.599) _Findings of the Association for Compu-_
_tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023_, pages 8928–8942,
Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul
Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2023. Palm: Scaling language
modeling with pathways. _Journal of Machine Learn-_
_ing Research_, 24(240):1–113.


Seong Yeub Chu, Jong Woo Kim, and Mun Yong Yi.
[2025. Think together and work better: Combining](https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713181)



[humans’ and llms’ think-aloud outcomes for effec-](https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713181)
[tive text evaluation. In](https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713181) _Proceedings of the 2025 CHI_
_Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-_
_tems_, CHI ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.


Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. _arXiv:1810.04805_ .


Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models.
_arXiv:2407.21783_ .


Alexander R Fabbri, Wojciech Kry´sci´nski, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Dragomir
Radev. 2021. Summeval: Re-evaluating summarization evaluation. _Transactions of the Association for_
_Computational Linguistics_, 9:391–409.


Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei
Liu. 2023. Gptscore: Evaluate as you desire.
_arXiv:2302.04166_ .


Mingqi Gao, Xinyu Hu, Li Lin, and Xiaojun Wan. 2024a.
Analyzing and evaluating correlation measures in nlg
meta-evaluation. _arXiv:2410.16834_ .


Mingqi Gao, Xinyu Hu, Jie Ruan, Xiao Pu, and Xiao[jun Wan. 2024b. Llm-based nlg evaluation: Current](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267406182)
[status and challenges.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267406182) _ArXiv_, abs/2402.01383.


Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Behnam Hedayatnia, Qinlang Chen, Anna Gottardi, Sanjeev Kwatra, Anu
Venkatesh, Raefer Gabriel, and Dilek Hakkani-Tür.
[2019. Topical-Chat: Towards Knowledge-Grounded](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2019-3079)
[Open-Domain Conversations. In](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2019-3079) _Proc. Interspeech_
_2019_, pages 1891–1895.


Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan,
Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen,
Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, et al. 2024. A survey on
llm-as-a-judge. _arXiv:2411.15594_ .


Jing Gu, Qingyang Wu, and Zhou Yu. 2021. Perception
score: A learned metric for open-ended text generation evaluation. In _Proceedings of the AAAI Con-_
_ference on Artificial Intelligence_, volume 35, pages
12902–12910.


Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. 2023. Mistral
7b. _arXiv:2310.06825_ .


Dongfu Jiang, Yishan Li, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang,
[Bill Yuchen Lin, and Wenhu Chen. 2024. TIGER-](https://openreview.net/forum?id=EE1CBKC0SZ)
[Score: Towards building explainable metric for all](https://openreview.net/forum?id=EE1CBKC0SZ)
[text generation tasks.](https://openreview.net/forum?id=EE1CBKC0SZ) _Transactions on Machine_
_Learning Research_ .


Ryo Kamoi, Tanya Goyal, Juan Diego Rodriguez, and
Greg Durrett. 2023. Wice: Real-world entailment for
claims in wikipedia. _arXiv:2303.01432_ .


Alex Kim, Keonwoo Kim, and Sangwon Yoon. 2024.

[DEBATE: Devil‘s advocate-based assessment and](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.112)
[text evaluation. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.112) _Findings of the Association for_
_Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024_, pages 1885–
1897, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Seungone Kim, Jamin Shin, Yejin Cho, Joel Jang,
Shayne Longpre, Hwaran Lee, Sangdoo Yun,
Seongjin Shin, Sungdong Kim, James Thorne, et al.
2023. Prometheus: Inducing fine-grained evaluation
capability in language models. _arXiv:2310.08491_ .


Kalpesh Krishna, Erin Bransom, Bailey Kuehl, Mohit Iyyer, Pradeep Dasigi, Arman Cohan, and Kyle
Lo. 2023. Longeval: Guidelines for human evaluation of faithfulness in long-form summarization.
_arXiv:2301.13298_ .


Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient
memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In _Proceedings of the ACM_
_SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-_
_ciples_ .


Philippe Laban, Wojciech Kryscinski, Divyansh Agarwal, Alexander Fabbri, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty,
[and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2023. SummEdits: Measuring](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.600)
[LLM ability at factual reasoning through the lens](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.600)
[of summarization. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.600) _Proceedings of the 2023 Con-_
_ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language_
_Processing_, pages 9662–9676, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Yukyung Lee, Soonwon Ka, Bokyung Son, Pilsung
Kang, and Jaewook Kang. 2024. Navigating the path
of writing: Outline-guided text generation with large
language models. _arXiv:2404.13919_ .


[Bo Li, Irina Sigler, and Yuan Xue. 2024. Evaluating](https://nips.cc/virtual/2024/tutorial/99524)
[large language models - principles, approaches, and](https://nips.cc/virtual/2024/tutorial/99524)
[applications. Neurips 2024 Tutorial.](https://nips.cc/virtual/2024/tutorial/99524)


Margaret Li, Jason Weston, and Stephen Roller. 2019.
Acute-eval: Improved dialogue evaluation with
optimized questions and multi-turn comparisons.
_arXiv:1909.03087_ .


Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries. In _Text summarization_
_branches out_, pages 74–81.


Minqian Liu, Ying Shen, Zhiyang Xu, Yixin Cao, Eunah Cho, Vaibhav Kumar, Reza Ghanadan, and Lifu
Huang. 2023a. X-eval: Generalizable multi-aspect
text evaluation via augmented instruction tuning with
auxiliary evaluation aspects. _arXiv:2311.08788_ .



Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang,
Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023b. Gpteval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human
alignment. _arXiv:2303.16634_ .


Yixin Liu, Alex Fabbri, Pengfei Liu, Yilun Zhao, Linyong Nan, Ruilin Han, Simeng Han, Shafiq Joty,
Chien-Sheng Wu, Caiming Xiong, and Dragomir
[Radev. 2023c. Revisiting the gold standard: Ground-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.228)
[ing summarization evaluation with robust human](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.228)
[evaluation. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.228) _Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-_
_ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics_
_(Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pages 4140–4170, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Yuxuan Liu, Tianchi Yang, Shaohan Huang, Zihan
Zhang, Haizhen Huang, Furu Wei, Weiwei Deng,
Feng Sun, and Qi Zhang. 2023d. Calibrating llmbased evaluator. _arXiv:2309.13308_ .


Yuxuan Liu, Tianchi Yang, Shaohan Huang, Zihan
Zhang, Haizhen Huang, Furu Wei, Weiwei Deng,
[Feng Sun, and Qi Zhang. 2024. HD-eval: Aligning](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.413)
[large language model evaluators through hierarchical](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.413)
[criteria decomposition. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.413) _Proceedings of the 62nd_
_Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational_
_Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pages 7641–
7660, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Neil Mallinar, A Ali Heydari, Xin Liu, Anthony Z
Faranesh, Brent Winslow, Nova Hammerquist, Benjamin Graef, Cathy Speed, Mark Malhotra, Shwetak Patel, et al. 2025. A scalable framework for
evaluating health language models. _arXiv preprint_
_arXiv:2503.23339_ .


Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis,
Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle[moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore:](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741)
[Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741)
[in long form text generation. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741) _Proceedings of the_
_2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural_
_Language Processing_, pages 12076–12100, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Ani Nenkova and Rebecca J Passonneau. 2004. Evaluating content selection in summarization: The pyramid
method. In _Proceedings of the human language tech-_
_nology conference of the north american chapter of_
_the association for computational linguistics: Hlt-_
_naacl 2004_, pages 145–152.


Jekaterina Novikova, Ondˇrej Dušek, Amanda Cer[cas Curry, and Verena Rieser. 2017. Why we need](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1238)
[new evaluation metrics for NLG. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1238) _Proceedings of_
_the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-_
_ral Language Processing_, pages 2241–2252, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.


2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. _Advances in neural in-_
_formation processing systems_, 35:27730–27744.


Qian Pan, Zahra Ashktorab, Michael Desmond, Martín
Santillán Cooper, James Johnson, Rahul Nair, Elizabeth Daly, and Werner Geyer. 2024. Human-centered
design recommendations for LLM-as-a-judge. In
_Proceedings of the 1st Human-Centered Large Lan-_
_guage Modeling Workshop_, TBD. ACL.


Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In _Proceedings of the_
_40th annual meeting of the Association for Computa-_
_tional Linguistics_, pages 311–318.


Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Honglei Zhuang,
Junru Wu, Le Yan, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Jialu
Liu, Donald Metzler, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael
[Bendersky. 2024. Large language models are effec-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.97)
[tive text rankers with pairwise ranking prompting. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.97)
_Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-_
_guistics: NAACL 2024_, pages 1504–1518, Mexico
City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin,
[and Sameer Singh. 2020. Beyond accuracy: Behav-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.442)
[ioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.442) _Pro-_
_ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associa-_
_tion for Computational Linguistics_, pages 4902–4912,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe
Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard
Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari,
Alexandre Ramé, et al. 2024. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size.
_arXiv:2408.00118_ .


Rickard Stureborg, Dimitris Alikaniotis, and Yoshi
Suhara. 2024. Large language models are inconsistent and biased evaluators. _arXiv:2405.01724_ .


Annalisa Szymanski, Simret Araya Gebreegziabher,
Oghenemaro Anuyah, Ronald A Metoyer, and Toby
Jia-Jun Li. 2024. Comparing criteria development
across domain experts, lay users, and models in large
language model evaluation. _arXiv:2410.02054_ .


[Hongyin Tang, Miao Li, and Beihong Jin. 2019. A topic](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1513)
[augmented text generation model: Joint learning of](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1513)
[semantics and structural features. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1513) _Proceedings of_
_the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-_
_ral Language Processing and the 9th International_
_Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing_
_(EMNLP-IJCNLP)_, pages 5090–5099, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Alex Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Mike Lewis. 2020.

[Asking and answering questions to evaluate the fac-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.450)
[tual consistency of summaries.](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.450) _Proceedings of the_
_58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-_
_tational Linguistics_ .



Tianlu Wang, Ilia Kulikov, Olga Golovneva, Ping Yu,
Weizhe Yuan, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Richard Yuanzhe
Pang, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Jason Weston,
and Xian Li. 2024. Self-taught evaluators.
_arXiv:2408.02666_ .


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. _Advances in Neural_
_Information Processing Systems_, 35:24824–24837.


Dustin Wright, David Wadden, Kyle Lo, Bailey Kuehl,
Arman Cohan, Isabelle Augenstein, and Lucy Lu
Wang. 2022. Generating scientific claims for zeroshot scientific fact checking. _arXiv:2203.12990_ .


Meng-Chen Wu, Md Mosharaf Hossain, Tess Wood,
Shayan Ali Akbar, Si-Chi Chin, and Erwin Cornejo.
[2025. SEEval: Advancing LLM text evaluation effi-](https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-naacl.411/)
[ciency and accuracy through self-explanation prompt-](https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-naacl.411/)
[ing. In](https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-naacl.411/) _Findings of the Association for Computa-_
_tional Linguistics: NAACL 2025_, pages 7357–7368,
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Tianhao Wu, Weizhe Yuan, Olga Golovneva, Jing Xu,
Yuandong Tian, Jiantao Jiao, Jason Weston, and
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. 2024a. Meta-rewarding language models: Self-improving alignment with llmas-a-meta-judge. _arXiv:2407.19594_ .


Wenhao Wu, Wei Li, Xinyan Xiao, Jiachen Liu, and
[Sujian Li. 2024b. InstructEval: Instruction-tuned text](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.799)
[evaluator from human preference. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.799) _Findings of_
_the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL_
_2024_, pages 13462–13474, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Ziang Xiao, Susu Zhang, Vivian Lai, and Q. Vera Liao.
[2023. Evaluating evaluation metrics: A framework](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.676)
[for analyzing NLG evaluation metrics using measure-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.676)
[ment theory. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.676) _Proceedings of the 2023 Conference_
_on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-_
_ing_, pages 10967–10982, Singapore. Association for
Computational Linguistics.


Wenda Xu, Danqing Wang, Liangming Pan, Zhenqiao
Song, Markus Freitag, William Yang Wang, and
Lei Li. 2023. Instructscore: Towards explainable
text generation evaluation with automatic feedback.
_arXiv:2305.14282_ .


An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu,
Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. 2024. Qwen2. 5 technical report. _arXiv:2412.15115_ .


Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. 2021.
Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text generation. _Advances in Neural Information Processing_
_Systems_, 34:27263–27277.


Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Evaluating
text generation with bert. _arXiv:1904.09675_ .


Wei Zhao, Maxime Peyrard, Fei Liu, Yang Gao, Christian M Meyer, and Steffen Eger. 2019. Moverscore: Text generation evaluating with contextualized embeddings and earth mover distance.
_arXiv:1909.02622_ .


Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang,
[Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging](https://openreview.net/forum?id=uccHPGDlao)
[LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena.](https://openreview.net/forum?id=uccHPGDlao)
In _Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information_
_Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track_ .


Ming Zhong, Yang Liu, Da Yin, Yuning Mao,
Yizhu Jiao, Pengfei Liu, Chenguang Zhu, Heng
Ji, and Jiawei Han. 2022. Towards a unified
multi-dimensional evaluator for text generation.
_arXiv:2210.07197_ .


Lianghui Zhu, Xinggang Wang, and Xinlong Wang.
[2025. JudgeLM: Fine-tuned large language models](https://openreview.net/forum?id=xsELpEPn4A)
[are scalable judges. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=xsELpEPn4A) _The Thirteenth International_
_Conference on Learning Representations_ .


**A** **Detailed Experimental Setup**


**A.1** **Baselines**


**Baselines for main comparison (Table 1)** (1)
**BERTScore** (Zhang et al., 2019) calculates text
similarity by contextual embeddings of BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). (2) **MoverScore** (Zhao et al.,
2019) extends BERTScore by incorporating soft
alignments, allowing words to be dynamically
matched across texts. It refines similarity computation through an improved aggregation strategy that
accounts for word importance and semantic shifts.
(3) **BARTScore** (Yuan et al., 2021) evaluates text
quality by computing the average likelihood of a
generated output under a BART-based conditional
probability model. (4) **UniEval** (Zhong et al., 2022)
is a multi-dimensional evaluation framework that

assesses various dimensions of text generation by
leveraging both reference-based and reference-free
evaluation. (5) **G-Eval** (Liu et al., 2023b) is an
LLM-based method, using chain-of-thought (Wei
et al., 2022) and a form-filling paradigm to generate evaluation scores on a Likert scale. We select

G-Eval as the main comparison point due to its
widespread adoption (Liu et al., 2023a, 2024), as
well as considering the similarity between G-Eval
and CheckEval that neither approach involves complex prompt engineering, additional model training
or multi-agent evaluation. (6) **SEEval** (Wu et al.,
2025) is a prompt-based evaluator that incorporates
self-explanation, guiding the model to justify its
rating decisions without additional training.


**Baselines for Comparative Analysis (Table 10)**
(1) **TIGERScore** (Jiang et al., 2024) is a Llama 2
fine-tuned evaluation method that uses LLM to perform an explainable text evaluation. (2) **GPTScore**
(Fu et al., 2023) evaluates text by computing the
conditional log-likelihood of reference or output
generated under LLM. (3) **Analyze-Rate** (Chiang and Lee, 2023) analyzes how specific design
choices in LLM-based evaluation, such as explanation prompting and output format, affect alignment
with human judgment and finds that encouraging
explanation improves correlation. (4) **HD-EVAL**
(Liu et al., 2024) decomposes the evaluation into
fine-grained criteria and trains a regression model
to aggregate them in alignment with human preferences through iterative preference-based optimization.



**A.2** **Detailed Process of Seed Question**
**Writing**


We constructed seed questions based on predefined evaluation criteria (e.g., coherence, consistency), aiming for atomic, conceptually clear, and
non-overlapping formulations. Each evaluation dimension was first decomposed into finer-grained
sub-dimensions, and a set of seed questions was
written to cover each sub-dimension. This ensured

both conceptual coverage and balance across dimensions. To guide this process, we consulted
prior task-specific literature (e.g., summarization
evaluation papers) and followed established guidelines where available. We observed that overly finegrained seed questions often led LLMs to generate
augmented variants that deviated from the original
intent. Therefore, we intentionally maintained an
appropriate granularity level to preserve alignment
throughout augmentation. All seed questions were
cross-validated by our team to ensure clarity, consistency, and relevance across different evaluation
dimensions.


**A.3** **Top-3 Models per Evaluation Method**


The following models achieved the highest correlation with human judgments for each evaluation
method: **CheckEval** (SummEval: GPT-4-Turbo,
Mistral-Large, Gemma2-27B ; Topical-Chat:
GPT-4-Turbo, GPT-4o, Mistral-Large ), **G-**
**Eval** (SummEval: GPT-4-Turbo, GPT-4o-mini,
Mistral-Large ; Topical-Chat: GPT-4-Turbo,
Mistral-Large, Qwen2.5-72B ), and **SEEval**
(SummEval: Mistral-Large, GPT-4-Turbo,
Qwen2.5-32B ; Topical-Chat: Mistral-Large,
Qwen2.5-72B, GPT-4-Turbo).


**A.4** **Human Validation**


To validate CheckEval, we conducted three human evaluation studies (correlation, agreement
study: Section 6.2 and Checklist Validation Figure 2). For these studies, summaries were randomly
sampled from the SummEval dataset using stratification based on original human annotation scores
to ensure balanced coverage across quality levels.
Each study involves three Ph.D student-level evaluators. We recruited three human evaluators with

Ph.D. student-level qualifications or above in Computer Science, all of whom had a background in
evaluation research and summarization/dialogue
tasks. Each participant was compensated with a
gift card equivalent to approximately 10,000 KRW


**Model** **Evaluation** **CNN** **Xsum** **Average**
**Methods**


_r_ _ρ_ _τ_ _r_ _ρ_ _τ_ _r_ _ρ_ _τ_


Table 7: Average correlation scores across dimensions on the QAGS-CNN and QAGS-Xsum. we report _r_, _ρ_ and _τ_ .
Colors indicate model groups: large (pink), medium (blue), small (green) and GPT (purple).



( _≈_ 7 USD) per hour. [5]


For the correlation study (Table 4 - Correlation),
20 summaries are randomly sampled from the SummEval dataset. These summaries are subsequently
evaluated on a binary (yes/no) basis against a
checklist comprising four dimensions: coherence,
consistency, fluency, and relevance.


For the agreement study (Table 4 - Agreement),
100 summaries are sampled from the SummEval
dataset. These summaries are then evaluated on a

binary (yes/no) basis concerning only relevance
due to practical cost constraints (evaluation this
dimension alone already requires each annotator to
answer approximately 10K questions). The sample
size of 100 was calculated from a power analysis
based on a pilot study.


For the checklist validation study (Figure 2),
each annotator saw the same set of items, with approximately 28 questions per evaluation dimension
in SummEval and 26 in Topical-Chat.


5 Note that the annotation was conducted in South Korea,
where the compensation level is slightly above the local mini
mum wage.



**Model** **Evaluation** **CNN** **Xsum**
**Group** **Methods**

_α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_


G-Eval 0.2215 0.3624 0.2873 0.2853
All
CheckEval **0.4149** **0.4149** **0.3416** **0.3416**


G-Eval 0.1595 0.3345 0.1166 0.3772
Large
CheckEval **0.6420** **0.6420** **0.5189** **0.5189**


G-Eval 0.0526 0.5612 0.0546 0.3458
Medium
CheckEval **0.5971** **0.5970** **0.4074** **0.4074**


G-Eval 0.0805 0.0761 0.1796 0.0440
Small
CheckEval **0.0846** **0.0846** **0.1881** **0.1880**


G-Eval 0.0625 0.3920 0.1674 0.2156
GPT
CheckEval **0.4720** **0.4719** **0.2998** **0.2997**


G-Eval 0.0489 0.4845 0.0349 0.4381
Top-3
CheckEval **0.5234** **0.5234** **0.5066** **0.5066**


Table 8: IEA - QAGS


**B** **Additional Results**


**B.1** **Additional experiments with QAGS**


Table 7 shows the correlation between various

evaluation methods and human judgments on the
QAGS dataset. The results show that CheckEval
outperforms G-Eval for 9 out of the 12 LLMs (com

**SummEval** Coh. Con. Flu. Rel. Avg.


EM 0.7330 0.6920 0.7100 0.5710 0.6765


**Topical-Chat** Coh. Eng. Gro. Nat. Avg.


EM 0.6470 0.6670 0.6300 0.5910 0.6338


Table 9: Agreement (Exact Match) for each dimension
in checklist validation.


parable to results on the other two datasets reported
in the main text), indicating its effectiveness as an
evaluation Framework. Furthermore, Table 8 compares the IEA of G-Eval and CheckEval on the
QAGS dataset. Across all model groups, CheckEval consistently achieves a higher IEA than G-Eval,
demonstrating its advantage in robustness.


**B.2** **Comparative performance of various**
**LLM-as-a-Judge methods**


We also included a broader comparison with recent
evaluation methods surveyed in Gu et al. (2024);
Gao et al. (2024b). For CheckEval and G-Eval,
we use scores using the best-performing evaluator in our experiments (Mistral-large). Table 10
shows that CheckEval performs well overall on
both datasets, and remains competitive even compared to more recent approaches. However, we
would like to emphasize again that our main goal
is not to propose the best-performing LLM-as-ajudge method. Instead, our focus is on building a
more reliable evaluation process and analyzing its
consistency across different LLMs, and that is why
comparison to G-Eval is the most directly relevant
result.


**B.3** **Checklist Validation**


To quantify the reliability of human annotations
in the checklist validation study, we adopted Exact Match as our IAA metric over more common

alternatives like Fleiss’s Kappa. This choice was
motivated by two characteristics of our data. The
evaluation results showed a response distribution
heavily concentrated on ‘Yes’ (or 1) due to the high
quality of the items (see Figure Figure 2), which
can make Kappa’s chance correction misleading.
Furthermore, the small number of items per dimension (fewer than 30) can impact the stability of
Kappa scores. Given these factors, we report Exact
Match scores of 0.677 for SummEval and 0.634 for

Topical-Chat (see Table 9).



**Evaluation** **Model** **SummEval (Avg.) Topical-Chat (Avg.)**
**Methods** _ρ_ _τ_ _ρ_ _r_


TIGERScore LLaMA 2–13B _[†]_ 0.39 0.31 0.28 0.26

GPTScore GPT-4 0.39 0.34 0.36 0.34

G-Eval Mistral-large 0.52 0.47 0.64 0.62
Analyze-Rate Claude 3 Sonnet 0.53 0.44 0.64 0.64
HD-EVAL GPT-4 0.53 – 0.62 0.63

SEEval Claude 3 Sonnet 0.52 0.47 0.65 0.64

**CheckEval** **Mistral-large** **0.55** **0.48** **0.65** **0.65**


Table 10: Comparative performance of various LLM-asa-Judge methods. Models marked with _†_ are fine-tuned.


**C** **Discussion**


**C.1** **Analysis of Performance on High and**
**Low-Quality Texts**


As LLMs improve, their high-quality outputs become more fluent and coherent, making it increasingly difficult for evaluation methods to differentiate subtle quality differences. Meanwhile, lowquality text poses a different challenge, as its overall readability is low, obscuring distinctions between evaluation criteria and making it harder to
properly assess all target dimensions of quality.
Given these differences, it is important to assess
how evaluation methods handle varying levels of
text quality. To this end, we conduct a detailed
dimension-wise analysis by dividing the data into
high-quality and low-quality groups based on human annotation scores (e.g., on a 1–5 scale, treat
scores _≥_ 3 as High, _<_ 3 as Low). We compute the
average correlation across 12 LLMs to analyze
how CheckEval and G-Eval align with human judgments for different levels of text quality.
As shown in Figure 4, CheckEval consistently
achieves higher correlations with human judgments
than G-Eval in high-quality texts across all dimensions. Notably, for SummEval, CheckEval shows
much stronger alignment in fluency (0.34 vs.
0.16). For Topical-Chat, it outperforms G-Eval in
engagingness (0.60 vs. 0.42) and naturalness
(0.44 vs. 0.35) by a large margin.
However, for low-quality texts, while CheckEval generally maintains stronger correlations compared to G-Eval, it exhibits performance drops in a
small number of cases, notably in fluency (SummEval) and groundedness (Topical-Chat). From
our additional analysis of the results, one possible
explanation is that discrepancies between benchmark definitions and actual human annotations of
these dimensions may have contributed to the observed performance drop in CheckEval. For example, while SummEval defines fluency as the ab

(a) SummEval


(b) Topical-Chat


Figure 4: dimension-wise correlation analysis of G-Eval
(purple) and CheckEval (pink), with samples divided
based on human annotator ratings into High-Quality
(human ratings _≥_ 3) and Low-Quality (human ratings
_<_ 3) groups. Each bar represents correlation with human
judgments across different quality dimensions.


sence of formatting issues, capitalization errors, or
ungrammatical sentence structures that hinder readability, human annotators often prioritized overall readability over strict grammatical correctness.
Since CheckEval relies on fine-grained Boolean
QA decisions aligned with predefined criteria, the
correlation with human scores may be impacted
when human annotation practices deviate from the
exact evaluation guidelines. In the groundedness
dimension of Topical-Chat, a different issue arises.
For low-quality texts, CheckEval’s strict yes/no
framework often results in uniformly low scores,
making it difficult to distinguish between varying degrees of poor responses. In contrast, G-Eval,
which allows for more gradient judgments, showed
advantages in these cases. This suggests potential
refinements to the Boolean QA framework to better
handle annotation inconsistencies while preserving
its fine-grained evaluation capability.


**C.2** **Does CheckEval need question**
**weighting?**


We conducted an additional analysis to investigate
whether incorporating question-specific weights
improves the reliability of CheckEval scores. Motivated by HD-Eval (Liu et al., 2024), we trained
a linear regression model using 20% of the SummEval data to estimate the relative importance (i.e.,



**Model** **Aggregation** **SummEval (Avg.)**
**Strategy**

_ρ_ _τ_


Table 11: Effect of question weighting strategy on SummEval.


weights) of each checklist question. These weights
were then used to compute a weighted CheckEval score. To assess robustness, the process was
repeated across five random seeds, each sampling
a different 20% subset of the data. Table 11 reports
the average results and standard deviation across
seeds. “original” denotes the unweighted CheckEval score, while “weighted” denotes the score after
applying the learned question-specific weights. The
overall results were mixed. A couple of evaluator
models benefited from learning the weights, but
most others did not. Since there were no reliable

gains from weighting the questions, we ultimately
chose not to incorporate weighted aggregation into
our results. While we only experimented with a simple linear weighting strategy here, we could explore
more sophisticated methods of estimating question
importance as well as learning weights that are
generalizable across different evaluator models in
future work.


**C.3** **Does Binarizing Likert-Scale Outputs**
**Close the IEA Gap?**


We conducted an additional analysis to investigate
whether the observed IEA gap is a fundamental difference between the evaluation protocols or simply
an artifact of their different output formats (binary
vs. Likert). One way to test this would be to directly


**Dataset** **Dimension** **Original** **Binary** **Binary**

**Scale** **Conversion 1** **Conversion 2**


SummEval All 1–5 [4,5] _→_ 1 [3,4,5] _→_ 1

[1,2,3] _→_ 0 [1,2] _→_ 0

Topical Chat Coh./Eng./Nat. 1–3 [3] _→_ 1 [2,3] _→_ 1

[1,2] _→_ 0 [1] _→_ 0

Topical Chat Gro. 0–1 – –

QAGS All 0–1 – –


Table 12: Binary conversion schemes applied to GEval’s Likert-scale outputs to enable fairer IEA comparison.


binarize the Likert scores derived from the evalu
ator models. We conducted this experiment with
G-Eval’s Likert-scale outputs–that is, we converted
the Likert scores (1-5 scale for SummEval and 1-3
scale for Topical-Chat) to binary (0/1) scores by
mapping the lower values to 0 and higher values
to 1. To ensure that the results are not affected

by the mapping choice of the middle value on the
scale, we tested both possible versions of the mapping schemes: treating the middle value as 0 and 1,
respectively, as detailed in Table 12. Scores of evaluation dimensions that already employed a binary
scoring scheme were not converted.


The results, shown in Tables 13 and 14, are clear
and consistent. While binarizing the outputs does
improve G-Eval’s IEA scores compared to using
the original Likert scale scores, a large performance
gap to CheckEval remains across all model groups.
We therefore conclude that the performance difference is not solely an effect of the output format but
stems from the fundamental improvements in our
proposed checklist-based evaluation protocol.


**C.4** **Does Increasing the Inference Budget**
**Strengthen the Baselines?**


To address the possibility that our performance
gains stem from differences in the inference budget, we increased the budget for the baseline. One
straightforward way to do this is to sample multiple
outputs and aggregate the results. We applied this
method to G-Eval on Topical-Chat, setting ‘temperature=1.0’ to enable diverse generations and
using ‘n=3’ samples before averaging the scores.
As shown in Table 16, the resulting correlations
changed minimally ( _r_ 0.6387 vs. 0.6389; _ρ_ 0.6169
vs. 0.6176), indicating that this aggregation does
not close the performance gap with our checklistbased approach.



**Model Size** **Method** _α_ _κ_


**All** G-Eval 0.0929 0.1859

G-Eval (binary [4,5]→1) 0.1063 0.2812

G-Eval (binary [3,4,5]→1) 0.1074 0.2835

CheckEval **0.4803** **0.4803**


**Best** G-Eval 0.0731 0.2266

G-Eval (binary [4,5]→1) 0.0666 0.4650

G-Eval (binary [3,4,5]→1) 0.0666 0.4647

CheckEval **0.6471** **0.6471**


**GPT** G-Eval 0.0841 0.2018

G-Eval (binary [4,5]→1) 0.0693 0.3012

G-Eval (binary [3,4,5]→1) 0.0676 0.3016

CheckEval **0.5575** **0.5575**


**Large** G-Eval 0.0512 0.1586

G-Eval (binary [4,5]→1) 0.3204 0.4646

G-Eval (binary [3,4,5]→1) 0.3228 0.4575

CheckEval **0.6731** **0.6731**


**Medium** G-Eval 0.0430 0.1411

G-Eval (binary [4,5]→1) 0.0606 0.2758

G-Eval (binary [3,4,5]→1) 0.0658 0.2821

CheckEval **0.5617** **0.5617**


**Small** G-Eval 0.0635 0.0998

G-Eval (binary [4,5]→1) 0.1450 0.1984

G-Eval (binary [3,4,5]→1) 0.0835 0.1995

CheckEval **0.2387** **0.2387**


Table 13: IEA on SummEval after converting G-Eval’s
Likert-scale outputs to binary formats.


**D** **The number of questions at each stage**


We provide a step-by-step breakdown of the number of questions, from the initial seed questions
through the augmentation and filtering stages to
the final checklist, with the number of questions
varying across different dimensions. Before and
after filtering, the correlation shows slight variations. For the SummEval, Spearman’s _ρ_ changed
from 0.4790 to 0.4816, while Kendall’s _τ_ changed
from 0.4143 to 0.4163. In the Topical-Chat, Pearson’s _r_ remained unchanged at 0.5553, whereas
Spearman’s _ρ_ increased from 0.5446 to 0.5546. The
number of questions for each dataset is reported in
Table 17 and 18, respectively.


**E** **Open-source model information**


Table 19 provides links to all open-source models
used in our experiments. Table 20 lists each model
along with its corresponding license. Table 21 summarizes the datasets used and their associated li
censes. If a dataset is publicly available but no
explicit license is provided, we denote the license
as ‘–’ in the table.


**Model Size** **Method** _α_ _κ_


**All** G-Eval 0.0589 0.3407

G-Eval (binary [3]→1) 0.0565 0.3841

G-Eval (binary [2,3]→1) 0.1711 0.3893

CheckEval **0.4494** **0.4494**


**Best** G-Eval 0.0255 0.5593

G-Eval (binary [3]→1) 0.0181 0.5799

G-Eval (binary [2,3]→1) 0.0181 0.5806

CheckEval **0.5736** **0.5736**


**GPT** G-Eval 0.0385 0.4971

G-Eval (binary [3]→1) 0.0231 0.5196

G-Eval (binary [2,3]→1) 0.0240 0.5151

CheckEval **0.5395** **0.5395**


**Large** G-Eval 0.0145 0.5088

G-Eval (binary [3]→1) 0.0090 0.5749

G-Eval (binary [2,3]→1) 0.0092 0.5753

CheckEval **0.6736** **0.6736**


**Medium** G-Eval 0.0688 0.2231

G-Eval (binary [3]→1) 0.0585 0.2450

G-Eval (binary [2,3]→1) 0.0613 0.2410

CheckEval **0.5044** **0.5043**


**Small** G-Eval 0.0372 0.1636

G-Eval (binary [3]→1) 0.0635 0.1713

G-Eval (binary [2,3]→1) 0.0674 0.1591

CheckEval **0.1669** **0.1668**


Table 14: IEA on Topical-Chat after converting G-Eval’s
Likert-scale outputs to binary formats.


Dataset Correlation Method Mean Variance


SummEval Spearman G-Eval 0.3989 0.0100

SEEval 0.4116 0.0129

CheckEval 0.4808 0.0019

Kendall G-Eval 0.3647 0.0084

SEEval 0.3684 0.0111

CheckEval 0.4163 0.0016


Topical-Chat Spearman G-Eval 0.4342 0.0220

SEEval 0.4759 0.0245

CheckEval 0.5553 0.0043

Pearson G-Eval 0.4797 0.0205

SEEval 0.4679 0.0231

CheckEval 0.5546 0.0042


Table 15: Mean and variance for each dataset and corre
lation method


**Aspect** **Metric** _ρ_ _r_



Mistral-Large



G-Eval 0.6389 0.6176

G-Eval aggregation (n=3) 0.6387 0.6169

SEEVal 0.6352 0.6323

CheckEval 0.6451 0.6453



Table 16: Comparison of Evaluation Methods under
Different Inference Budgets.



**Coherence** **Consistency** **Fluency** **Relevance**


Seed Questions 3 3 4 5
Diversification 7 12 11 5
Elaboration 13 14 24 21

Filtered Questions 0 0 4 5

Final Checklist 23 29 35 26


Table 17: The number of questions - SummEval.


**Naturalness** **Coherence** **Engagingness** **Groundedness**


Seed Questions 5 4 4 5
Diversification 9 6 10 6
Elaboration 14 11 17 15

Filtered Questions 0 1 0 0

Final Checklist 28 20 31 26


Table 18: The number of questions - Topical-Chat.


**Model** **Link**


Llama3.1-70B [https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct)
Mistral-large (123B) [https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-Large-Instruct-2411](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-Large-Instruct-2411)
Qwen2.5-72B [https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct)
Mistral-Small (22B) [https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-Small-Instruct-2409](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-Small-Instruct-2409)
Gemma2-27B [https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-27b-it](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-27b)
Qwen2.5-32B [https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct)
Llama3.1-8B [https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct)
Gemma2-9B [https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b-it](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b-it)
Qwen2.5-7B [https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct)


Table 19: Model Links.


**Models** **License**


meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct llama3.1

mistralai/Mistral-Large-Instruct-2411 mrl

Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct qwen

mistralai/Mistral-Small-Instruct-2409 mrl

google/gemma-2-27b-it gemma

Qwen/Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct Apache license 2.0

meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct llama3.1

google/gemma-2-9b-it gemma

Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Apache license 2.0

GPT-4 Turbo Proprietary

GPT-4o Proprietary

GPT-4o-mini Proprietary


Table 20: List of models and their corresponding li
censes.


**Datasets** **License**


SummEval MIT license

Topical-chat CDLA-Sharing-1.0

                      QAGS


Table 21: List of datasets and their corresponding li
censes.


**F** **Prompts**


Figure 5 and 6 shows the detailed evaluation
prompt. Figure 7 and 8 shows the detailed augmentation prompt. Figure 9 shows the filtering prompt.


**Model** **Evaluation** **Coherence** **Consistency** **Fluency** **Relevance** **Average**
**Method** _ρ_ _τ_ _ρ_ _τ_ _ρ_ _τ_ _ρ_ _τ_ _ρ_ _τ_

|LLM-as-a-judge|Col2|
|---|---|
|**Llama3.1-70B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5206<br>0.4459<br>0.3513<br>0.3306<br>0.3104<br>0.2924<br>0.4371<br>0.3800<br>SEEval<br>0.5836<br>0.4821<br>0.4188<br>0.3878<br>0.2287<br>0.2043<br>0.4037<br>0.3295<br>CheckEval<br>0.6222<br>0.5264<br>0.5406<br>0.4913<br>0.2637<br>0.2288<br>0.4248<br>0.3682<br>**Mistral-Large**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5892<br>0.5078<br>0.6153<br>0.5824<br>0.3611<br>0.3435<br>0.5026<br>0.4368<br>SEEval<br>0.5472<br>0.5132<br>0.6065<br>0.5782<br>0.4563<br>0.4352<br>0.5406<br>0.4581<br>CheckEval<br>0.6439<br>0.5424<br>0.6132<br>0.5668<br>0.4563<br>0.3926<br>0.4811<br>0.4169<br>**Qwen2.5-72B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.3937<br>0.3420<br>0.5248<br>0.4903<br>0.3202<br>0.3050<br>0.4762<br>0.4178<br>SEEval<br>0.4761<br>0.4002<br>0.5156<br>0.4742<br>0.3746<br>0.3452<br>0.5118<br>0.4390<br>CheckEval<br>0.5778<br>0.4932<br>0.5490<br>0.5047<br>0.4113<br>0.3582<br>0.4717<br>0.4092|0.4048<br>0.3622<br>0.4087<br>0.3509<br>**0.4628**<br>**0.4037**<br>0.5171<br>0.4676<br>0.5377<br>0.4962<br>**0.5486**_∗_<br>**0.4797**_∗_<br>0.4287<br>0.3888<br>0.4695<br>0.4147<br>**0.5025**<br>**0.4413**|
|**Mistral-Small**<br>G-Eval<br>0.2885<br>0.2463<br>0.2748<br>0.2532<br>0.0134<br>0.0126<br>0.1629<br>0.1343<br>SEEval<br>0.1260<br>0.1003<br>0.2040<br>0.1823<br>0.3822<br>0.3519<br>0.1829<br>0.1468<br>CheckEval<br>0.5297<br>0.4531<br>0.5113<br>0.4712<br>0.3098<br>0.2670<br>0.4381<br>0.3837<br>**Gemma2-27B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5731<br>0.4951<br>0.5111<br>0.4684<br>0.1596<br>0.1520<br>0.5239<br>0.4515<br>SEEval<br>0.5892<br>0.5021<br>0.4829<br>0.4552<br>0.3629<br>0.2132<br>0.5193<br>0.4361<br>CheckEval<br>0.6199<br>0.5244<br>0.4924<br>0.4485<br>0.4402<br>0.3756<br>0.4906<br>0.4220<br>**Qwen2.5-32B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5361<br>0.4682<br>0.5550<br>0.5199<br>0.3606<br>0.3420<br>0.5363<br>0.4703<br>SEEval<br>0.5731<br>0.4681<br>0.5578<br>0.5267<br>0.3893<br>0.3460<br>0.4352<br>0.4371<br>CheckEval<br>0.6056<br>0.4938<br>0.5311<br>0.4767<br>0.4879<br>0.4157<br>0.4605<br>0.3797|0.1849<br>0.1616<br>0.2238<br>0.1953<br>**0.4472**<br>**0.3937**<br>0.4419<br>0.3917<br>0.4886<br>0.4017<br>**0.5108**<br>**0.4426**<br>0.4970<br>**0.4501**<br>0.4889<br>0.4445<br>**0.5213**<br>0.4415|
|**Llama3.1-8B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.2689<br>0.2253<br>0.2988<br>0.2763<br>0.0088<br>0.0087<br>0.3644<br>0.3139<br>SEEval<br>0.2684<br>0.2190<br>0.0508<br>0.0483<br>0.1623<br>0.1472<br>0.1488<br>0.1251<br>CheckEval<br>0.5045<br>0.4048<br>0.4561<br>0.3887<br>0.3040<br>0.2654<br>0.3933<br>0.3168<br>**Gemma2-9B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5649<br>0.4895<br>0.4555<br>0.4206<br>-0.0252<br>-0.0221<br>0.5272<br>0.4602<br>SEEval<br>0.5636<br>0.4843<br>0.4045<br>0.3935<br>0.2876<br>0.2510<br>0.4520<br>0.4548<br>CheckEval<br>0.5777<br>0.4876<br>0.3979<br>0.3450<br>0.2798<br>0.2358<br>0.4590<br>0.4003<br>**Qwen2.5-7B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.3785<br>0.3270<br>0.5343<br>0.5020<br>0.3309<br>0.3146<br>0.4154<br>0.3617<br>SEEval<br>0.3950<br>0.3259<br>0.4767<br>0.4373<br>0.2595<br>0.2352<br>0.4350<br>0.3623<br>CheckEval<br>0.4068<br>0.3398<br>0.4214<br>0.3800<br>0.4598<br>0.4226<br>0.3768<br>0.3183|0.2352<br>0.2060<br>0.1576<br>0.1349<br>**0.4145**<br>**0.3439**<br>0.3806<br>0.3370<br>0.4269<br>0.3959<br>**0.4286**<br>**0.3672**<br>0.4148<br>**0.3763**<br>0.3916<br>0.3402<br>**0.4162**<br>0.3652|
|**GPT-4 Turbo**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4912<br>0.4251<br>0.6498<br>0.6229<br>0.3878<br>0.3668<br>0.5064<br>0.4397<br>SEEval<br>0.5292<br>0.4621<br>0.6351<br>0.6031<br>0.3551<br>0.3327<br>0.4728<br>0.4501<br>CheckEval<br>0.5807<br>0.4901<br>0.6232<br>0.5872<br>0.4611<br>0.4058<br>0.4197<br>0.3713<br>**GPT-4o**<br>G-Eval<br>0.1896<br>0.1581<br>0.4219<br>0.3911<br>0.2862<br>0.2676<br>0.3969<br>0.3421<br>SEEval<br>0.3391<br>0.3618<br>0.4421<br>0.4162<br>0.3665<br>0.3512<br>0.4021<br>0.3617<br>CheckEval<br>0.5564<br>0.4644<br>0.5304<br>0.4738<br>0.4699<br>0.4125<br>0.4602<br>0.4001<br>**GPT-4o-mini**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4826<br>0.4197<br>0.5243<br>0.4837<br>0.2734<br>0.2598<br>0.5192<br>0.4524<br>SEEval<br>0.5149<br>0.4221<br>0.4831<br>0.4567<br>0.3552<br>0.3005<br>0.4882<br>0.4681<br>CheckEval<br>0.5854<br>0.4829<br>0.4939<br>0.4286<br>0.3883<br>0.3314<br>0.4975<br>0.4199|0.5088<br>**0.4636**<br>0.4981<br>0.4620<br>**0.5212**<br>**0.4636**<br>0.3237<br>0.2897<br>0.3875<br>0.3727<br>**0.5042**<br>**0.4377**<br>0.4499<br>0.4039<br>0.4604<br>0.4119<br>**0.4913**<br>**0.4157**|



Table 22: Sample-level Spearman ( _ρ_ ) and Kendall tau ( _τ_ ) correlations on the SummEval. The best score per model
category is **bolded**, and the highest overall score is marked with ***** .


**Model** **Evaluation** **Coherence** **Consistency** **Fluency** **Relevance** **Average**

**Group** **Methods** _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_


All G-Eval 0.0751 0.2706 0.0539 0.1625 0.1626 0.0699 0.0799 0.2407 0.0929 0.1859

SEEval 0.0713 0.1332 0.0837 0.1457 0.0789 0.1391 0.0861 0.1420 0.0800 0.1400

CheckEval 0.4242 0.4242 0.2963 0.2963 0.4422 0.4422 0.7584 0.7584 0.4803 0.4803


Large G-Eval 0.0448 0.2170 0.0476 0.0057 0.0621 0.2372 0.0502 0.1745 0.0512 0.1586

SEEval 0.0531 0.1827 0.0674 0.1965 0.0592 0.1884 0.0603 0.1924 0.0600 0.1900

CheckEval 0.7154 0.7154 0.5757 0.5757 0.5207 0.5206 0.8806 0.8806 0.6731 0.6731


Medium G-Eval 0.0096 0.3742 0.0229 0.1306 0.0970 -0.1462 0.0424 0.2057 0.0430 0.1411

SEEval 0.0826 0.1234 0.0947 0.1361 0.0883 0.1292 0.0944 0.1313 0.0900 0.1300

CheckEval 0.6455 0.6455 0.2723 0.2723 0.5851 0.5851 0.7440 0.7440 0.5617 0.5617


Small G-Eval 0.0704 0.2237 0.0044 0.1351 0.1089 -0.1161 0.0702 0.1564 0.0635 0.0998

SEEval 0.0117 0.0628 0.0265 0.0741 0.0189 0.0663 0.0229 0.0768 0.0200 0.0700

CheckEval 0.0827 0.0826 0.0237 0.0237 0.1746 0.1746 0.6739 0.6739 0.2387 0.2387


GPT G-Eval 0.1425 0.1513 0.0984 0.0823 0.0064 0.3388 0.0889 0.2347 0.0841 0.2018

SEEval 0.1196 0.3097 0.1338 0.3289 0.1275 0.3158 0.1391 0.3256 0.1300 0.3200

CheckEval 0.5081 0.5081 0.4135 0.4135 0.5473 0.5473 0.7612 0.7612 0.5575 0.5575


Top-3 G-Eval 0.1104 0.2360 0.1002 0.0544 0.0171 0.3751 0.0647 0.2407 0.0731 0.2266

SEEval 0.0812 0.1786 0.0973 0.1962 0.0884 0.1927 0.0931 0.1925 0.0900 0.1900

CheckEval 0.6236 0.6236 0.4836 0.4836 0.6698 0.6698 0.8114 0.8114 0.6471 0.6471


Table 23: IEA - SummEval.


**Model** **Evaluation** **Coherence** **Engagingness** **Groundedness** **Naturalness** **Average**
**Methods** _ρ_ _r_ _ρ_ _r_ _ρ_ _r_ _ρ_ _r_ _ρ_ _r_

|LLM-as-a-judge|Col2|
|---|---|
|**Llama3.1-70B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4089<br>0.3622<br>0.3968<br>0.3501<br>0.6190<br>0.5553<br>0.3684<br>0.2991<br>SEEval<br>0.5160<br>0.4923<br>0.6384<br>0.6312<br>0.6091<br>0.6164<br>0.4223<br>0.4238<br>CheckEval<br>0.5517<br>0.5360<br>0.6547<br>0.6551<br>0.4706<br>0.4917<br>0.6065<br>0.6082<br>**Mistral-Large**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5709<br>0.5699<br>0.7135<br>0.6996<br>0.6217<br>0.5703<br>0.6494<br>0.6307<br>SEEval<br>0.6207<br>0.6146<br>0.7128<br>0.7055<br>0.6132<br>0.6139<br>0.5941<br>0.5950<br>CheckEval<br>0.6269<br>0.6174<br>0.7215<br>0.7206<br>0.5806<br>0.5766<br>0.6512<br>0.6664<br>**Qwen2.5-72B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5650<br>0.5507<br>0.6944<br>0.6870<br>0.6122<br>0.6217<br>0.5927<br>0.5812<br>SEEval<br>0.5448<br>0.5419<br>0.6605<br>0.6552<br>0.5942<br>0.6066<br>0.5879<br>0.5896<br>CheckEval<br>0.5551<br>0.5506<br>0.7204<br>0.7199<br>0.4769<br>0.4873<br>0.6252<br>0.6398|0.4483<br>0.3917<br>0.5465<br>0.5409<br>**0.5709**<br>**0.5727**<br>0.6389<br>0.6176<br>0.6352<br>0.6323<br>**0.6451**_∗_<br>**0.6453**_∗_<br>**0.6161**<br>**0.6102**<br>0.5969<br>0.5983<br>0.5944<br>0.5994|
|**Mistral-Small**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4439<br>0.4215<br>0.6550<br>0.6411<br>0.6939<br>0.5102<br>0.5103<br>0.4996<br>SEEval<br>0.2531<br>0.2478<br>0.1768<br>0.1971<br>0.1276<br>0.1238<br>0.1169<br>0.1274<br>CheckEval<br>0.3925<br>0.4225<br>0.6061<br>0.5914<br>0.4789<br>0.4826<br>0.4191<br>0.4777<br>**Gemma2-27B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4086<br>0.4337<br>0.3286<br>0.2928<br>0.2680<br>0.2361<br>0.2173<br>0.1953<br>SEEval<br>0.4551<br>0.4621<br>0.4212<br>0.4512<br>0.3551<br>0.3795<br>0.4627<br>0.4215<br>CheckEval<br>0.5036<br>0.4952<br>0.6390<br>0.6323<br>0.3794<br>0.3718<br>0.5825<br>0.5714<br>**Qwen2.5-32B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4834<br>0.4515<br>0.3663<br>0.2697<br>0.4616<br>0.3082<br>0.5367<br>0.4924<br>SEEval<br>0.4551<br>0.4351<br>0.4116<br>0.4642<br>0.4531<br>0.3621<br>0.5517<br>0.5921<br>CheckEval<br>0.4918<br>0.4702<br>0.6914<br>0.6806<br>0.4139<br>0.4363<br>0.6300<br>0.6350|**0.5758**<br>**0.5181**<br>0.1686<br>0.1740<br>0.4742<br>0.4935<br>0.3056<br>0.2895<br>0.4235<br>0.4286<br>**0.5261**<br>**0.5177**<br>0.4620<br>0.3804<br>0.4679<br>0.4634<br>**0.5568**<br>**0.5555**|
|**Llama3.1-8B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.1109<br>0.1013<br>0.1031<br>0.0813<br>0.1702<br>0.0959<br>0.0667<br>0.0765<br>SEEval<br>0.2531<br>0.2478<br>0.1768<br>0.1971<br>0.1276<br>0.1238<br>0.1169<br>0.1274<br>CheckEval<br>0.5046<br>0.4986<br>0.5200<br>0.5069<br>0.3972<br>0.3934<br>0.4050<br>0.3876<br>**Gemma2-9B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4357<br>0.3879<br>0.5512<br>0.4123<br>0.4742<br>0.3055<br>0.3681<br>0.2969<br>SEEval<br>0.4130<br>0.4303<br>0.6116<br>0.6016<br>0.4334<br>0.4441<br>0.5020<br>0.5087<br>CheckEval<br>0.3943<br>0.4232<br>0.6520<br>0.6588<br>0.4167<br>0.4136<br>0.4971<br>0.5137<br>**Qwen2.5-7B**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4625<br>0.4540<br>0.5496<br>0.5111<br>0.3346<br>0.1429<br>0.4459<br>0.4421<br>SEEval<br>0.4130<br>0.3918<br>0.5747<br>0.5735<br>0.4681<br>0.4551<br>0.4648<br>0.4322<br>CheckEval<br>0.3704<br>0.3840<br>0.6329<br>0.6266<br>0.4712<br>0.4247<br>0.4489<br>0.4486|0.1127<br>0.0887<br>0.1686<br>0.1740<br>**0.4567**<br>**0.4466**<br>0.4573<br>0.3507<br>0.4900<br>0.4962<br>**0.4900**<br>**0.5023**<br>0.4481<br>0.3875<br>0.4802<br>0.4632<br>**0.4809**<br>**0.4710**|
|**GPT-4 Turbo**<br>G-Eval<br>0.4924<br>0.4719<br>0.7026<br>0.6900<br>0.6112<br>0.6126<br>0.5724<br>0.5512<br>SEEval<br>0.5012<br>0.5162<br>0.7123<br>0.7221<br>0.6232<br>0.6231<br>0.5829<br>0.5922<br>CheckEval<br>0.5209<br>0.5232<br>0.7367<br>0.7438<br>0.6292<br>0.6341<br>0.6425<br>0.6476<br>**GPT-4o**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5917<br>0.5669<br>0.6111<br>0.5770<br>0.3903<br>0.1655<br>0.4770<br>0.4255<br>SEEval<br>0.6011<br>0.5881<br>0.6551<br>0.5822<br>0.4512<br>0.2620<br>0.5331<br>0.4627<br>CheckEval<br>0.5889<br>0.5790<br>0.7362<br>0.7354<br>0.5869<br>0.5761<br>0.6462<br>0.6448<br>**GPT-4o-mini**<br>G-Eval<br>0.5424<br>0.5333<br>0.6024<br>0.5623<br>0.5748<br>0.5744<br>0.5977<br>0.5756<br>SEEval<br>0.5426<br>0.5277<br>0.6051<br>0.5771<br>0.5831<br>0.5651<br>0.5441<br>0.5569<br>CheckEval<br>0.5140<br>0.5171<br>0.5980<br>0.5984<br>0.6362<br>0.6241<br>0.6038<br>0.6160|0.5947<br>0.5814<br>0.6049<br>0.6134<br>**0.6323**<br>**0.6372**<br>0.5175<br>0.4337<br>0.5601<br>0.4738<br>**0.6395**<br>**0.6338**<br>0.5793<br>0.5614<br>0.5687<br>0.5567<br>**0.5880**<br>**0.5889**|



Table 24: Turn-level Spearman ( _ρ_ ) and Pearson ( _r_ ) correlations on Topical-Chat. The best score per model category
is **bolded**, and the highest overall score is marked with ***** .


**Model** **Evaluation** **Coherence** **Engagingness** **Groundedness** **Naturalness** **Average**

**Group** **Methods** _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_ _α_ _κ_


All G-Eval 0.0651 0.3051 0.0418 0.3263 0.0825 0.4443 0.0462 0.2871 0.0589 0.3407

SEEval 0.0741 0.3123 0.0668 0.3185 0.0674 0.3089 0.0717 0.3032 0.0700 0.3100

CheckEval 0.4796 0.4796 0.4354 0.4354 0.3995 0.3995 0.4830 0.4830 0.4494 0.4494


Large G-Eval 0.0070 0.4550 0.0110 0.5134 0.0030 0.7288 0.0371 0.3378 0.0145 0.5088

SEEval 0.5573 0.6091 0.5416 0.6074 0.5528 0.6137 0.5482 0.6085 0.5500 0.6100

CheckEval 0.6486 0.6486 0.6626 0.6626 0.6263 0.6263 0.7569 0.7569 0.6736 0.6736


Medium G-Eval 0.1680 0.1361 0.0115 0.2581 0.0572 0.2907 0.0384 0.2074 0.0688 0.2231

SEEval 0.0527 0.3426 0.0614 0.3362 0.0595 0.3407 0.0659 0.3393 0.0600 0.3400

CheckEval 0.3635 0.3635 0.5338 0.5338 0.4486 0.4486 0.6715 0.6715 0.5044 0.5043


Small G-Eval 0.0357 0.1535 0.0287 0.1528 0.0603 0.2139 0.0242 0.1343 0.0372 0.1636

SEEval 0.1615 0.1487 0.1553 0.1511 0.1628 0.1494 0.1674 0.1542 0.1600 0.1500

CheckEval 0.4040 0.4040 0.2127 0.2127 0.0218 0.0218 0.0289 0.0289 0.1669 0.1668


GPT G-Eval 0.0079 0.4970 0.0698 0.3936 0.0225 0.6910 0.0536 0.4067 0.0385 0.4971

SEEval 0.1191 0.5057 0.1217 0.5123 0.1175 0.5148 0.1283 0.5021 0.1200 0.5100

CheckEval 0.5651 0.5651 0.2452 0.2452 0.6124 0.6124 0.7352 0.7352 0.5395 0.5395


Top-3 G-Eval 0.0234 0.4389 0.0015 0.6510 0.0020 0.7701 0.0752 0.3773 0.0255 0.5593

SEEval 0.0597 0.3375 0.0614 0.3401 0.0558 0.3418 0.0579 0.3405 0.0600 0.3400

CheckEval 0.6215 0.6215 0.2481 0.2480 0.6435 0.6434 0.7813 0.7812 0.5736 0.5736


Table 25: IEA - Topical-Chat.


Figure 5: Evaluation Prompt - SummEval


Figure 6: Evaluation Prompt - Topical-Chat


Figure 7: Augmentation - Question Diversification Prompt


Figure 8: Augmentation - Question Elaboration Prompt


Figure 9: Filtering Prompt


|Dimension|Sub-dimension|Seed Questions|
|---|---|---|
|**Coherence**|Topic Maintenance|Does the summary consistently focus on the central topic without deviat-<br>ing into unrelated areas?|
|**Coherence**|Logical Flow|Does the summary present information in a logical order?|
|**Coherence**|Consistent Point of View|Is the point of view or perspective in the summary consistent with the<br>source?|
|**Consistency**|Factual Consistency|Does the summary accurately represent the facts from the source?|
|**Consistency**|No New Information|Does the summary avoid introducing information not present in the<br>original source?|
|**Consistency**|Contextual Accuracy|Does the summary preserve the original purpose or intent of the source<br>document?|
|**Fluency**|Formatting|Is the summary free from formatting issues and correctly capitalized<br>throughout?|
|**Fluency**|Grammar|Are all sentences grammatically correct and free from errors?|
|**Fluency**|Completeness|Are all sentences complete, with no fragments or missing components?|
|**Fluency**|Readability|Is the summary easy to read, without unnecessary complexity?|
|**Relevance**|Content Coverage|Does the summary encapsulate all critical points of the source document?|
|**Relevance**|Topic Consistency|Does the summary maintain the main topic of the source?|
|**Relevance**|Consistent Use of Terminology|Does the summary use the same terminology or jargon as the source?|
|**Relevance**|Use of Key Terms and Phrases|Does the summary incorporate key terms and phrases from the source<br>material effectively?|
|**Relevance**|Importance|Is each point mentioned in the summary important to the overall under-<br>standing of the original text?|



Table 26: Dimensions, sub-dimensions, and corresponding seed questions for SummEval.














|Dimension|Sub-dimension|Seed Questions|
|---|---|---|
|**Coherence**|Logical Flow|Does the response logically follow from the earlier part of the conversa-<br>tion, maintaining a clear fow of ideas?|
|**Coherence**|Relevance|Is the response directly relevant to the content and context of the previous<br>dialogue?|
|**Coherence**|Continuity|Does the response stay consistent with the topic discussed in the previous<br>dialogue?<br>Does the response integrate smoothly with the ongoing conversation,<br>ensuring a coherent progression?|
|**Engagingness**|Informative|Does the response add meaningful value to the conversation?|
|**Engagingness**|Emotional Engagement|Is the response friendly, polite, and empathetic?|
|**Engagingness**|Interest Level|Does the response capture interest or intrigue, making the conversation<br>more engaging?<br>Does the response actively contribute to keeping the conversation lively<br>and engaging?|
|**Groundedness**|Relevance|Does the response appropriately address the preceding question or state-<br>ment?<br>Does the answer provide new information while maintaining the fow of<br>the conversation?<br>Does it effectively utilize the key information that has been mentioned<br>in the conversation?|
|**Groundedness**|Consistency|Does the response remain consistent with previous utterances?<br>Does it avoid contradicting previously provided information?|
|**Naturalness**|Avoid repetition|Does the response avoid unnecessary repetition of the same content<br>between sentences?|
|**Naturalness**|Context relevance|Are all the sentences relevant to the topic of conversation and used<br>naturally within the context?|
|**Naturalness**|Clarity|Is the overall message clear and easy to understand?|
|**Naturalness**|Word choice and tone|Is the tone consistent throughout?<br>Are there no major grammatical errors?|



Table 27: Dimensions, sub-dimensions, and corresponding seed questions for Topical-Chat.


