## **Checklists Are Better Than Reward Models For** **Aligning Language Models**

**Vijay Viswanathan** _[♡]_ **Yanchao Sun** _[♣]_ **Shuang Ma** _[♣∗]_ **Xiang Kong** _[♣]_

**Meng Cao** _[♣]_ **Graham Neubig** _[♡]_ **Tongshuang Wu** _[♡]_

_♡_ Carnegie Mellon University _♣_ Apple


**Abstract**


Language models must be adapted to understand and follow user instructions.
Reinforcement learning is widely used to facilitate this – typically using fixed
criteria such as “helpfulness” and “harmfulness”. In our work, we instead propose
using flexible, instruction-specific criteria as a means of broadening the impact
that reinforcement learning can have in eliciting instruction following. We propose
“ **Reinforcement Learning from Checklist Feedback** ” ( **RLCF** ). From instructions,
we extract checklists and evaluate how well responses satisfy each item—using
both AI judges and specialized verifier programs—then combine these scores to
compute rewards for RL. We compare RLCF with other alignment methods on top
of a strong instruction following model ( `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` ) on five widelystudied benchmarks – **RLCF is the only method to help on every benchmark**,
including a 4-point boost in hard satisfaction rate on FollowBench, a 6-point
increase on InFoBench, and a 3-point rise in win rate on Arena-Hard. We show
that RLCF can also be used off-policy to improve `Llama 3.1 8B Instruct` and
`OLMo 2 7B Instruct` . These results establish rubrics as a key tool for improving
language models’ support of queries that express a multitude of needs. We release
our our dataset of rubrics ( _WildChecklists_ ), models, and code to the public. [1]


**1** **Introduction**


Language models must follow user instructions to be useful. As the general public integrates language
model-based assistants into their completion of daily tasks, there is an expectation that models can
faithfully follow the users’ requests, which increasingly involve rich, multi-step instructions [Liu
et al., 2024a, Zhao et al., 2024, Zheng et al.]. Today’s models are almost universally trained to follow
instructions via a two-step process: instruction finetuning, followed by reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF). Instruction finetuning, where the model is trained to mimic responses
generated by annotators [Raffel et al., 2019], has historically been the primary workhorse for imbuing
language models with some amount of instruction following ability [Wang et al., 2022, Chung et al.,
2022, Xu et al., 2024, Lambert et al., 2024a]. Model developers then frequently employ RLHF, where
the model is trained to generate responses that look more like labeled “good” responses than “bad”
responses, as a refinement step to decrease the likelihood that the model exhibits predefined poor
behaviors (typically harmful behaviors) [Ziegler et al., 2019, Bai et al., 2022]. Unlike “verifiable”
tasks where reinforcement learning is a workhorse [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025, Lambert et al., 2024a,
Pyatkin et al., 2025], reinforcement learning remains difficult to utilize for ambiguous or “nonverifiable” tasks, such as instruction following. What would it take to make RL a general-purpose
solution at eliciting desirable behaviors in subjective or open-ended settings?


_∗_ Work performed while at Apple.
1 Code: `www.github.com/viswavi/RLCF`, Dataset: `www.huggingface.co/datasets/viswavi/rlcf`


39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).


|Prompt|Col2|
|---|---|
|List of airbnb in Singapore for 2 pax less than 5000 pesos per night|List of airbnb in Singapore for 2 pax less than 5000 pesos per night|
|_Generate_<br>_Checklist_|**_Student_**<br>**_Teacher_**<br>_Generate_<br>_Candidates_|


_DPO_



1. Does the text provide a list of Airbnbs in



1. 47.9


2. 0.0



1. “To find Airbnb’s in Singapore for 2 pax (2

people) […]
Below are a few hypothetical examples …”


2. “I apologize, but using pesos (PHP) to describe

prices in Singapore may be confusing …”



Singapore? _(weight: 100/100)_ 2. 0.0 _× 100_
2. Does each listing accommodate 2 people? 3. 100.0 _× 75_



2.


3.



100.0



_× 100_


_× 100_


_× 75_



_(weight: 100/100)_
3. Does the text provide useful tips if real
time listings are not available? _(weight: 75/100)_



1.


2.


3.



_Score_


77.0


_Score_


16.5



0.0


85.2

60.6



_× 100_


_× 100_


_× 75_



Figure 2: We propose _Reinforcement Learning from Checklist Feedback_, where sampled responses
are evaluated by a teacher model grounded on a fixed set of criteria. In our pipeline, given instructions,
we first generate checklists synthetically from the instructions, grade each response on each checklist
item, combine per-item scores into a single weighted checklist score, then use this score for RL.





We believe the solution must involve producing better reward signals. Recent work on RL for language
model alignment has focused on automatically obtaining feedback on model behavior, either by (1) exclusively using _instructions with verifiable answers_

[Dong et al., 2024, Pyatkin et al., 2025], (2) grading
responses with specially-trained reward models [Wang
et al., 2024a, Eisenstein et al., 2023], or (3) distilling
preferences from a larger prompted model [Bai et al.,
2022, Tunstall et al., 2023]. Using instructions with
verifiable answers can only reinforce limited aspects Figure 1: RL on Checklist Feedback
of behavior (ignoring subjective constructs, e.g. top
|100|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|40<br>60<br>80<br><br>IF<br> (<br>|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|Eval<br>avg)<br> InFo<br>Bench<br>FollowBench<br>   (HSR)<br> Alpaca<br>  Eval<br>  (WR)<br>Arena<br> Hard<br> (WR)|
|40<br>60<br>80<br><br>IF<br> (<br>||||||||
|40<br>60<br>80<br><br>IF<br> (<br>||||||||
|40<br>60<br>80<br><br>IF<br> (<br>||||||||
|Qw<br>DPO|n2.<br> (Sk|5~~-~~7B I<br>ywork|struc<br>)|||PO (Ultr<br>DPO (Che|feedback)<br>cklist)|
|||||||||


consistently improves Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct,

icality or style). Reward models (“RMs”) are flexible,

whereas every other source of automatic

but their notion of rewards can be arbitrary, leading to

feedback gives mixed results.

reward hacking [Eisenstein et al., 2023]. When distilling preferences from a larger model, that model must infer what aspects to grade on, reducing the
“generator-verifier gap” that enables RL [Swamy et al., 2025]. Even if multiple criterion-specific
prompts are used, these criteria may not be comprehensive [Bai et al., 2022, Glaese et al., 2022].


In this paper, we ask: “how can we grade responses to instructions in a manner that is _automatic_
(requires no human annotation), _flexible_ (considers all aspects of response quality), _intuitive_ (aligned
with perceptible differences in responses), and _applicable to any instruction or response_, to enable
more better language model alignment?” We propose extracting dynamic rubrics from instructions –
an approach we term **Reinforcement Learning from Checklist Feedback (RLCF)** . This approach
reduces the task of grading responses to answering a series of yes/no questions, which can be
answered by a model or by executing a verification program.


Our key contributions are:


1. We describe a new and improved algorithm for automatically generating checklists at scale.
2. We construct _WildChecklists_, a dataset consisting of 130,000 instructions and corresponding
checklists (generated synthetically). When applicable, we accompany items in each checklist
with a verification program to facilitate automatic evaluation. We plan to release this dataset to
the community as an artifact for future study.
3. We describe a new algorithm for grading responses according to checklists, using language
models and code, and we show to use this algorithm to rank responses for preference tuning.
4. We finetune `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` via reinforcement learning from checklist feedback using
_WildChecklists_, leading to a strong and improved 7B-parameter model for instruction following.


On 5 benchmarks covering both constrained instruction following (IFEval, InFoBench, FollowBench)
and general conversational assistance (AlpacaEval, Arena-Hard), we find that RLCF provides benefits
on all instruction following benchmarks while maintaining improved performance on general conversational assistance benchmarks. In contrast, all alternative forms of AI feedback lead to mixed results,


2





















Figure 1: RL on Checklist Feedback
consistently improves Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct,
whereas every other source of automatic
feedback gives mixed results.


as shown in Figure 1. RLCF provides a 5.4% relative improvement over `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` in
average hard satisfaction rate on FollowBench, a 6.9% relative improvement in overall requirement
following ratio on InFoBench, and a 6.4% relative improvement on Arena-Hard [Jiang et al., 2023, Qin
et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024]. RLCF can also be used off-policy; we see `Llama 3.1 8B Instruct`
and `OLMo 2 7B Instruct` improve using samples collected using `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` . Despite these considerable improvements, RLCF simply requires a teacher model, with no need for
additional data or human annotations, making this approach amenable to diverse languages or domains. We provide evidence that checklist-based rewards are well-correlated to human preference
judgments (comparable to many finetuned reward models) while providing a stronger learning signal
than alternatives.


**2** **Checklist Generation**


**Desiderata for checklists.** We define a _checklist_ as a sequence of _requirements_ paired with an
instruction that satisfy the following properties:


1. Each requirement in the checklist is a yes/no question (e.g. “Does the text contain 3 commas?”).
2. Each requirement in the checklist must be answered relative to a given candidate response.
3. A response would be considered acceptable if and only if the response answers “yes” to all
checklist requirements.


To satisfy definition #3, checklists must be _comprehensive_ (cover most relevant aspects of quality)
and _natural_ (entailed by their corresponding instructions). Based on the observation that false positive
rewards are often more detrimental to reinforcement learning than false negatives [Huang et al., 2024],
we want checklists that are _objective_ (facilitate automatic verification) and _atomic_ (each requirement
focuses on a single aspect of quality), to make requirement checking easier.


**Extract checklists per instruction.** We examine two methods to extract checklists:


  - `Direct:` We simply prompt an LM to extract a checklist from a given instruction [Cook et al.,
2024]. This approach is intuitive and simple but risks repeating the original instruction via these
individual criteria, which may limit _comprehensiveness_ and _objectiveness_ .

  - `Candidate-based:` We view a requirement as any aspect of an instruction that, when absent,
causes a response to fail. We propose a two-stage approach: produce responses of varying
quality, then prompt an LM to write a checklist of all their possible failure modes. For each
checklist item, we also prompt the model to generate an “importance” weight (from 0 to 100).


To compare these, we generate checklists for all instructions in InFoBench [Qin et al., 2024]. We use
`gpt-4o` to blindly evaluate each of these checklists on naturalness, objectivity, comprehensiveness,
and atomicity, then select the better one overall. We manually perform the same evaluation on a
_subset of 50 instructions_ from the “Easy Set” of InFoBench.


The results in Table 1 show that checklists generated by prompting an LLM directly are more natural.
However, providing candidate responses to the LLM leads to checklists with consistently better
objectiveness, atomicity, and overall quality. There are absolute differences between scores from the
two evaluations – partly because they use different subsets – but directional trends are consistent.
We find that this difference translates to downstream performance after performing RL training. In
Section 5.3, we show that Reinforcement Learning from Checklist Feedback is more effective on
checklists generated via the candidate-based method.


**Regularization via universal criteria.** In initial experiments, we found that optimizing for checklist
completion led to responses beginning with long preamble overviews, suggesting reward hacking.
Following Sun et al. [2023] (who report a similar issue in prior work), we add two “universal requirements” to all generated checklists. These requirements state “ _1) The response directly address the_
_request without excessive or off-topic information not necessary for addressing the user’s instruction?_
and _2) The response should match the context and the instruction, whether it requires professionalism,_
_friendliness, formality, or neutrality._ ”, with a corresponding total importance weight of 100/100.


**Dataset Generation** Using the candidate-based method, we generate checklists for 130,000 instructions from WildChat to create a new dataset, _WildChecklists_ . To generate candidate responses for
our method, we use `Qwen2.5-0.5B`, `Qwen2.5-1.5B`, `Qwen2.5-3B`, and `Qwen2.5-7B` [Yang et al.,
2024]. `Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct` is the checklist generator model for both methods.


3


Manual Evaluation Automatic Evaluation
_**Metric**_ **Direct** **Candidate-Based** **Direct** **Candidate-Based**


Naturalness **94.9** 93.9 **88.0** 85.1
Objectiveness 88.5 **91.9** 88.9 **89.7**
Comprehensiveness 74.0 **82.0** **69.2** 64.8
Atomicity 68.0 **90.0** 98.6 **99.0**


% Preferred Overall 38.0 **56.0** 40.6 **51.2**


Table 1: We evaluate two checklist generation methods on four specific aspects of quality and an
overall preference. Manual evaluation is performed on the first 50 rows of InFoBench “easy”, while
automatic evaluation is performed by `gpt-4o` on all 500 rows of InFoBench.


**3** **Reinforcement Learning from Checklist Feedback**


Given _WildChecklists_, we generate high-quality preference data for RL via a four-step process:


**Sampling Candidate Responses.** To facilitate RL, we sample response pairs from our base policy
with a temperature of 1.3 and a _top-p_ of 0.9 [Holtzman et al., 2019]. This is simpler than prior works
that systematically perturb samples to induce greater complexity [Sun et al., 2024, Dong et al., 2024].


**Flexible Scoring** Given a prompt, a response, and an individual checklist item, we use a combination
of an LM judge and a verifier program to grade the response. For each checklist item, we prompt a
judge model ( `Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct` ) using the prompt in Appendix B to generate a numerical
score between 0 and 100. We take the average of 25 numerical scores sampled from the model. [2] .


LLMs struggle to evaluate hard, discrete criteria, such as “does the response contain the letter R at
least three times?” [Fu et al., 2024]. To handle such constraints, we follow prior work in generating a
program to grade responses when needed [Dong et al., 2024, Zhou et al., 2023]. We prompt a model
(using the prompt in Appendix B) to write code only when the model is confident it can exactly check
the requirement. For example, our program generator abstains from writing a verifier for the criterion
“Is the sentence coherent”. The program-graded score is then averaged with the AI judge’s score. [3]


**Preference Tuning.** Given a separate numerical score for each criterion for each response, we take
the average of these scores, weighted by the importance score of each criterion. We keep only the
40% of response pairs with the greatest difference along at least one criterion of its corresponding
checklist. This removes response pairs that are too similar to offer useful pairwise signal. We then
assign these responses as a preference pair for direct preference optimization [Rafailov et al., 2023].


**4** **Experimental Setup and Results**


**4.1** **Experimental Details**


**Training Data** As a fixed source of instructions for all methods, we use WildChat, a set of natural
conversations between users and AI language models crowdsourced from users across the world

[Zhao et al., 2024]. We filter out conversations that are non-English, toxic, or longer than two turns.


**Models** We experiment with finetuning `Qwen2.5-7B` and `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` . To produce AI
judgments or ground truth responses, we use `Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct` unless stated otherwise.


**Training** We finetune the model for 2 epochs using DPO with a batch size of 1024 and a maximum
sequence length of 2048. We use a cosine learning rate schedule with a max LR of 3e-6 and a min
LR of 2e-6. [4] We use OpenRLHF for training [Hu et al., 2024], and we train on one 8xH100 node
with 80GB GPU memory, which took roughly 3 hours for each model.


2
We sample responses using the `n` parameter in vLLM [Kwon et al., 2023]. This approach follows prior
work that describes the importance of using the mean score rather than mode score from an LM-as-a-judge
model [Wang et al., 2025a] Regardless, this makes the AI judge component the computational bottleneck of our
pipeline. In Section 5.7, we show that `n` can be significantly reduced, at a modest accuracy cost.
3 This approach is much simpler than the most relevant prior work that uses programs to evaluate responses,
AutoIF [Dong et al., 2024], which uses test-case generation and LM-based filters to remove low-quality programs.
4 When training models with Ultrafeedback, we instead used a minimum learning rate of 3e-7. We found this
parameter resulted in a slightly stronger baseline when learning from this feedback.


4


_(“Reward Models”)_





_Prompted Evaluators:_

_(“AI Judges”)_










|Classic RM Fine-Grained ArmoRM (MoE<br>(e.g. Skywork) RLHF w/ 19 experts)<br>Classic Ultra- Constitutional Checklist<br>AI Judge Feedback AI Feedback|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||



1 4 16 300k


# of explicit criteria available during evaluation


Figure 3: Checklist feedback can be viewed as an extreme mixture-of-evaluators, where the space of
(prompted) evaluators is unbounded and a unique subset of evaluators is chosen for each instruction.


**Benchmark Data** We evaluate our method on five benchmarks: IFEval [Zhou et al., 2023], InFoBench

[Qin et al., 2024], FollowBench [Jiang et al., 2023], AlpacaEval [Dubois et al., 2024], and Arena-Hard

[Li et al., 2024]. The first three of these measure instruction following ability in the presence of
fine-grained constraints. The last two measure “general-purpose” instruction following ability, using
naturalistic instructions based on user queries collected in the wild.


**4.2** **Baselines**


To show that RLCF is more effective than existing approaches, we compare against baselines:
_instruction finetuning_, _specially-trained reward models_ (using either a single reward or mixture of
rewards), and _prompted AI judges_ (using either a single evaluation rubric or a mixture of rubrics).


**Instruction Finetuning:** We compare with instruction finetuning, to isolate the benefit of additional
knowledge from the manner it is given (ground truth or rewards). Here, we distill [Hinton et al., 2015]
from a larger model, `Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct`, finetuned via `LlamaFactory` [Zheng et al., 2024].


**Reward Models:** We mirror our training approach for learning from checklist feedback, but using state-of-the-art reward models to decide which response should be chosen or rejected. We
use `Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Gemma-2-27B` [Liu et al., 2024b] and `ArmoRM-Llama3-8B-v0.1`

[Wang et al., 2024b] – both are highly rated on RewardBench [Lambert et al., 2024b]. [5]


**Prompted AI Judge:** We compare against using the same “teacher” model as a judge, without using
rubrics. We query this teacher in two settings: 1) _“Ultrafeedback”_, where the judge rates all candidate
responses from 1-5 [Cui et al., 2023] separately across four quality aspects (instruction following,
helpfulness, truthfulness, honesty) and averages these scores; and 2) _AI Judge_, where a near-identical
prompt as RLCF is used (§3) to similarly sample 25 scores between 0 and 100 from the judge.


In Figure 3, we unify these methods of automatic evaluation to distinguish our method from prior art.
In this context, checklist feedback can be viewed as a very large mixture of prompted evaluators.


**5** **Results**


**5.1** **RL from Checklist Feedback consistently improves language models**


Our proposed approach, RLCF, demonstrates consistent gains across all benchmarks (Table 2,
Table 3, and Table 4). On IFEval’s “loose” metrics (which apply minor preprocessing to responses
before checking for correctness), RLCF improves `Qwen-7B-Instruct` by 2.8-3.0% (relative), as
shown in the left half of Table 2. On FollowBench (shown in Table 3), RLCF achieves an 8.2%
increase on Constraint Satisfaction Level (CSL; the expected proportion of constraints satisfied) and
a 5.5% increase on average Hard Satisfaction Rate (how often all constraints are satisfied). RLCF
also performs competitively on InFoBench (right half of Table 2), achieving results comparable
to the best-performing reward model-based approaches while maintaining consistent gains across
all constrain-based benchmarks. On “general use-case” instruction following benchmarks, RLCF
consistently increases the win rate of `Qwen2.5-7B` over `GPT-4` (shown in Table 4), with the relative
improvement ranging from 2.8% to 8.4%.


5 `Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Gemma-2-27B` and `ArmoRM-Llama3-8B-v0.1` are ranked as #4 and #24,
respectively, on RewardBench as of July 2025.


5


IFEval (prompt) IFEval (inst.) InFoBench
**Loose** **Strict** **Loose** **Strict** **Avg** **Easy** **Hard** **Overall**


GPT-4 79.3 76.9 85.4 83.6 81.3 89.3 86.4 87.3


_Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct_ 75.0 72.5 81.8 79.9 77.3 82.7 76.0 78.1
+ SFT (Distilled) 66.9 64.1 75.3 72.8 69.8 79.9 70.6 73.5
+ DPO (via Skywork) 75.8 68.0 83.2 78.5 76.0 81.0 82.4 82.0
+ DPO (via ArmoRM) 73.8 70.2 81.7 78.3 76.0 **84.2** 83.1 83.5
+ DPO (via Ultrafbk.) 71.5 69.1 79.9 77.7 74.6 82.3 79.0 80.0
+ DPO (via AI Judge) 73.0 68.9 80.9 77.8 75.2 81.0 73.9 76.1
+ DPO (RLCF) **77.3** 72.6 **84.1** 80.3 **78.6** **84.2** **84.0** **84.1**


_Qwen2.5-7B (Base)_ 35.7 30.5 46.6 42.1 38.7 68.8 77.4 74.8
+ SFT on WildChat 38.1 33.5 52.2 48.6 43.1 78.1 80.1 79.5
+ DPO (RLCF) **43.4** **35.9** **56.4** **49.2** 46.2 **80.6** **80.5** **80.5**


Table 2: For instruction following, RLCF leads to large gains with open-ended constraints (InFoBench)
and slightly positive or neutral changes on format-based constraints (IFEval). Off-the-shelf reward
models help on InFoBench but hurt on IFEval. We show positive results (relative to the baseline) in
blue, negative in orange, and neutral (within 0.5) in gray; the top variant of a given model is bolded.


_FollowBench_ _Soft Satisfaction Rate_ _Hard Satisfaction Rate_
**Level** **L1** **L2** **L3** **L4** **L5** **Avg** **L1** **L2** **L3** **L4** **L5** **Avg** **CSL**


GPT-4 89.2 89.3 87.6 88.1 84.9 87.8 89.2 87.6 83.6 83.0 75.1 83.7 3.52


_Qwen2.5-7B-Instr._ 87.4 84.0 83.0 79.6 79.0 82.6 87.4 80.6 72.3 62.2 54.4 71.4 3.05
+ SFT (Distilled) 87.5 83.2 84.4 76.8 74.9 81.4 87.5 78.3 73.9 60.7 49.1 69.9 2.90
+ DPO (Skywork) 79.6 84.1 77.7 77.7 78.1 79.4 79.6 81.1 67.4 62.9 56.5 69.5 2.88
+ DPO (ArmoRM) 86.4 84.6 79.1 79.2 76.9 81.2 86.4 82.9 69.0 63.9 49.7 70.4 3.10
+ DPO (Ultrafbk.) 88.5 84.1 82.5 76.3 72.6 80.8 88.5 81.1 62.4 63.5 54.9 72.6 2.98
+ DPO (AI Judge) 87.2 87.9 75.7 79.2 77.6 81.5 87.2 83.5 62.4 63.5 54.9 70.3 2.95
DPO (RLCF) **88.6** **88.8** **83.8** **79.9** **81.0** **84.4** **88.6** **85.2** **75.8** **65.1** **61.8** **75.3** **3.30**


_Qwen2.5-7B (Base)_ 55.9 60.7 56.6 56.1 54.6 56.8 55.9 49.1 36.1 33.4 19.5 38.8 1.20
+ SFT (WildChat) 65.4 75.3 71.6 64.7 **65.1** 68.4 65.4 69.2 **57.4** **46.9** 40.3 55.8 2.02
+ DPO (RLCF) 70.6 76.0 69.5 63.6 57.8 67.5 70.6 67.7 49.6 42.4 28.3 51.7 2.08
+ RLCF w/o code **70.9** **77.1** **73.3** **66.0** 63.5 **70.2** **70.9** **70.0** 56.5 42.9 **36.3** **55.3** **2.20**


Table 3: RLCF leads to improvements on FollowBench **across all metrics** when starting with an
instruction-tuned model, while using an off-the-shelf reward model for preference labeling leads
to regressions for most metrics. This algorithm also helps when applied to a non-instruction-tuned
model, though it does not beat supervised finetuning. “CSL” stands for “Constraint Satisfaction
Level”. We show positive results (relative to the baseline) in blue, negative in orange, and neutral
(within 0.5 for satisfaction rate or 0.05 for CSL) in gray; the top variant of a given model is bolded.


**5.2** **Comparing automatic evaluators**


In Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4, we observe our approach of performing RL from Checklist Feedback (RLCF) outperforms RL from other sources of automatic evaluation across most benchmarks.
However, off-the-shelf reward models show mixed results depending on the benchmark. _Skywork_
( `Skywork-Reward-Gemma-2-27B` ), a leading model on the RewardBench leaderboard, shows strong
improvements with RLHF on InFoBench, Arena-Hard, and AlpacaEval – RLHF via Skywork notably
outperforms RLCF on AlpacaEval by a large margin. However, Skywork-guided RLHF leads to
notable regressions as on IFEval and FollowBench. Similarly, RLHF with _ArmoRM_ shows significant
improvements on AlpacaEval and InFoBench, modest/mixed results on Arena-Hard and FollowBench,
and significant regressions on IFEval.


We also evaluate checklist feedback’s ability as a judge on RewardBench [6] . Table 5 shows checklist
scores are well-correlated with preference annotations on RewardBench, especially for the "Chat"
and "Chat Hard" categories [Lambert et al., 2024b]. However, specialized reward models ( _Skywork_,


6 Unlike our method for checklist generation on WildChat, here we do not use any ground truth or output
from other models when generating checklists.


6


_Arena-Hard_ _AlpacaEval_


**Vanilla** **Style-Controlled** **Vanilla** **Length-Controlled**


GPT-4 (0314) 50.0 50.0 22.1 35.3


_Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct_ 51.3 42.8 33.5 36.2
+ SFT (Distilled) 32.6 29.2 36.1 33.3
+ DPO (via Skywork) **55.1** **50.3** **44.8** **41.5**
+ DPO (via ArmoRM) 50.8 46.4 37.6 38.1
+ DPO (via Ultrafeedback) 52.8 47.9 33.7 38.7
+ DPO (via AI Judge) 51.0 44.4 28.8 33.4
+ DPO (RLCF) 54.6 48.4 36.2 37.1


_Qwen2.5-7B (Base)_ 19.6 24.1 8.9 9.4
+ SFT on WildChat 8.8 8.8 9.4 7.5
+ DPO (RLCF) 19.4 21.6 **11.2** 10.5
+ RLCF w/o program verification **23.1** **27.1** 11.0 **13.9**


Table 4: We compare methods on two “general” instruction following benchmarks: Arena-Hard and
AlpacaEval. RLCF gives modest but consistent gains on both the original metric and length/stylecontrolled metric on each benchmark. We show positive results (relative to the baseline) in blue,
negative in orange, and neutral (within 0.5) in gray; the top variant of a given model is bolded.


Chat Chat Hard Safety Reasoning


Skywork-27B 96.1 **89.9** **93.0** **98.1**
ArmoRM **96.9** 76.8 90.5 97.3

Checklist-Based Reward 90.0 80.7 71.4 88.5


Table 5: On RewardBench, Specialized reward models like Skywork-27B and ArmoRM excel at
predicting which response is superior. Our checklist-based approach is worse on this this benchmark,
but still achieves competitive performance on challenging categories like Chat Hard and Reasoning.


_ArmoRM_ ), are much better here, though worse at supervising RLHF. This follows prior evidence that
reward model “accuracy” is poorly correlated with efficacy in RLHF [Malik et al., 2025, Razin et al.,
2025]. Note that our method shows relatively less correlation with Safety – our implementation of
RLCF is not designed as a substitute for safety alignment (see more discussion in §Section 5.5).


**5.3** **Learning from candidate-based vs directly-generated checklists**


In Section 2, we described a novel method for _candidate-based_ checklist generation, and we presented
some intrinsic evaluation showing that this method generates good checklists. Do these checklists
indeed translate to better models after RL training?


In Table 6, we observe that RLCF is consistently better using “candidate-based” checklists than using
checklists generated “directly“ by prompting: 2% better on IFEval, equally good on InFoBench, and
2-3% better on FolllowBench. This shows that RLCF depends on detailed, and objective checklists
that may offer more new information than checklists obtained directly from the original prompt.


**5.4** **Where does checklist feedback help?**


Does checklist feedback help with a specific aspect of instructions, such as rule-based format
constraints? Performance on specific constraint types on FollowBench, shown in Table 7, shows that,
unsurprisingly, prompt-based scoring is helpful for prompts involving style or format constraints.
We also see that **RLCF is best for “content” constraints**, which are qualifiers included on openended questions to limit the valid space of answers (e.g. “ _How might economic data from_ _the past_
_quarter_ _affect the Fed’s decision on interest rates? Additionally, consider_ _how inflation rates might_
_infuence their decision.l_ ”). This suggests **checklist feedback incentivizes models to attend to the**
**full instruction** rather than using a few influential spans to generate responses.


This hypothesis is supported by qualitative analysis of the preference data in Table 8. We observe
that using an AI judge with a single rubric is often insensitive to major changes in the prompt. When
the user asks to translate an utterance to Spanish, the AI judge assigns a 100-point score to both a


7


IFEval (prompt) IFEval (inst.) InFoBench FollowBench
**Loose** **Strict** **Loose** **Strict** **Avg** **Overall** **SSR** **HSR**


_Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct_ 75.0 72.5 81.8 79.9 77.3 78.1 82.6 71.4
+ RLCF (direct) 74.3 69.5 81.5 77.9 76.9 **84.3** 82.5 72.8
+ RLCF (candidate-based) **77.3** **72.6** **84.1** **80.3** **78.6** 84.1 **84.4** **75.3**


Table 6: Using candidate-based checklists is crucial to making RLCF work, suggesting that the
quality and properties of checklists are important for learning from checklist feedback.


Avg (HSR) Format Style Situation Content


GPT-4 83.7 83.3 97.3 78.2 76.0


_Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct_ 71.4 60.0 87.3 78.1 60.0
+ DPO (Skywork) 69.5 62.7 88.0 74.7 52.8
+ DPO (ArmoRM) 70.4 62.0 89.3 71.8 58.4
+ SFT (Distilled) 71.1 61.3 85.3 80.0 57.6
+ RLCF _w/o prompt-based scoring_ 73.6 62.7 90.7 **81.8** 59.2
+ RLCF _w/o program verification_ ) 73.8 **68.7** **91.3** 80.0 55.2
+ RLCF **75.3** 64.0 90.7 80.0 **66.4**


Table 7: On FollowBench, RLCF helps especially with “content” constraints, which are qualifiers that
restrict the valid space of answers. The metric shown is “average hard satisfaction rate”. We speculate
that RLCF helps models attend to full instructions. We show positive results in blue, negative in
orange, and neutral (within 0.5) in gray; the top variant of a given model is bolded.


perfect response and a poor response that contains a slightly flawed translation along with incoherent
phrases. In the second example, Skywork-27B assigns wildly different scores to responses with
identical meaning. The two scoring components of checklist feedback – a verification program and a
checklist-based AI judge – can balance each other’s shortcomings, as shown in the first example.


**5.5** **Does RLCF lead to specialization at the expense of generality?**


Do the gains shown by RLCF on instruction following come at the expense of domains not wellrepresented in the training data (WildChat)? WildChat focuses primarily on daily assistance, advice,
and analysis (75.5%), with only 12% on factual information and mathematics [Zhao et al., 2024].
Is this causing specialization at the expense of generality? We evaluate RLCF on three tasks with
limited representation in WildChat: refusal to answer unsafe prompts (measured on XSTest [Röttger
et al., 2023]), basic math (measured on GSM8K [Cobbe et al., 2021]), and hallucination prevention
(measured on TruthfulQA [Lin et al., 2021]). In Table 9, we see that RLCF slightly alters the model’s
safety profile (reducing false refusals while slightly impairing true refusals) and reduces GSM8K
and TruthfulQA performance by 1-1.5%. This suggests a need for expanding _WildChecklists_ to a
more diverse prompt distribution. Fortunately, this is easier than retraining a reward model. RMs like
Skywork-27B show better generality out-of-the-box (e.g. in Table 9) because they do not assume
fixed criteria, but support for very different prompts would require retraining [Malik et al., 2025].


**5.6** **RLCF improves other model families off-policy**


We use `Qwen2.5` models as the policy and judge in our experiments. Does RLCF still work for
other model families? Do our checklists capture universal criteria or are they tied to a particular
choice of model? Using _WildChecklists_ with samples from `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` scored by
`Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct`, we trained `Llama 3.1 8B Instruct` [Dubey et al., 2024] and `OLMo 2`
`7B Instruct` [OLMo et al., 2024] off-policy with DPO. In Table 10, we see positive results with
both models: `Llama` sees strong improvements with InFoBench/FollowBench after RLCF and `OLMo`
sees strong improvements with IFEval after RLCF, and there are no regressions for either model.
This suggests these checklists do capture universal criteria.


**5.7** **How much compute is required for producing checklist-based AI judgments?**


8


**Responses** **Skywork**
**Reward**


**Prompt** Translate to Spanish: “Hello how are you doing?”



**Checklist**
**(judge)**



**AI**
**Judge**



**Checklist**
**(code)**




“¡Hola, ¿cómo estás?” 25.5 100.0 100.0 95.2

“HOLA, rtant"Endpoint unfinished ¿CÓMO TE `际` " _>_ vak dao ”‘ ESTÁScaller"H!impo- `圣诞` ‘"[...]” 0.0 100.0 100.0 0.0


**Prompt** make a sentence with “dense”


“The forest was dense, with trees so close together [...]” 33.1 100.0 100.0 97.3


“The forest was blanketed by a layer of dense vegetation.” 8.0 100.0 100.0 96.6


Table 8: Comparing the scores assigned to various prompts and responses, we see that reward models
are too sensitive, prompted AI judges are too granular, and checklists give stable, interpretable scores.


XSTest GSM8K TruthfulQA
Safe ( _↑_ ) Unsafe ( _↑_ ) Overall ( _↑_ ) Accuracy MC1 MC2


_Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct_ 92.0 83.0 86.0 83.2 43.5 60.4
+ RLCF **95.6** 81.0 86.9 82.2 42.0 59.0
+ DPO (Skywork) **90.4** **89.0** **88.6** **85.6** **45.2** **63.1**


Table 9: In our experiments, RLCF uses prompts that focus primarily on daily assistance and writing

[Zhao et al., 2024]. This has a small effect on “non-target” tasks: refusal to answer unsafe prompts
(measured on XSTest), basic mathematical reasoning (measured on GSM8K), and hallucination
prevention (measured on TruthfulQA), suggesting that RLCF incurs modest trade-offs on underrepresented domains, which could be mitigated by improving domain coverage of training prompts.



As described in Section 3, RLCF grades responses on
each criterion using 25 samples from a judge model.
This creates the computational bottleneck of our scoring procedure. In Figure 4, we evaluated models
trained using RLCF modified to use fewer samples
from the judge. Response grading on WildChat with
3, 5, 10, or 25 samples took 32, 40, 72, and 92 hours,
respectively, on one 8xH100 node. We observe stable efficacy on IFEval [7] and InFoBench across sample
sizes. For FollowBench, using fewer samples hurts the
“content” and “situation” categories, suggesting that
a cheap, high-variance score may suffice for simpler
criteria but not for difficult, ambiguous instructions.


**6** **Related Works**













Our method is a new means of generating synthetic AI feedback. This follows prior work that use
“AI feedback” to guide reinforcement learning algorithms, either via a single prompt/rubric [Tunstall
et al., 2023] or a collection of rubrics [Cui et al., 2023]. In our paper, we show that checklist feedback
is significantly more effective than UltraFeedback [Cui et al., 2023], which evaluates responses on
four global principles. Our work is also related to prior works that use reward models as synthetic
preference annotators for RL [Sun et al., 2023]. In Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, we demonstrates the
risks of using reward models to supervise RL [Liu et al., 2024b, Wang et al., 2024c].


7 The models we trained all showed moderate variance on IFEval, so slight differences are likely due to noise.


9


IFEval (prompt) IFEval (inst.) InFoBench FollowBench
**Loose** **Strict** **Loose** **Strict** **Avg** **Overall** **SSR** **HSR**


_Llama 3.1 8B Instruct_ 79.1 71.3 83.5 76.2 77.5 83.1 77.6 68.0
+ RLCF (off-policy) **80.2** **71.9** 83.9 76.5 **78.1** **84.2** **81.8** **72.3**


_OLMo 2 7B Instruct_ 78.1 69.3 79.5 71.3 74.6 80.1 72.3 59.4
+ RLCF (off-policy) **79.6** **70.8** **82.0** **73.9** **76.6** 80.5 71.9 **60.4**


Table 10: RLCF works _off-policy_ for `OLMo 2 7B Instruct` and `Llama 3.1 8B Instruct` . For
`Llama`, we see neutral results with IFEval and strong improvements on InFoBench and FollowBench.
For `OLMo`, we see strong improvements with IFEval and neutral results on InFoBench and FollowBench.


We focus on complex instruction following. One line of work synthesizes instructions with explicit,
pathological constraints to train models to generalize to other instructions [Xu et al., 2023, He et al.,
2024, Sun et al., 2024, Dong et al., 2024]. These papers use DPO on controlled candidate responses,
while we contribute a drop-in evaluator which allows scoring responses sampled directly from a
student model (opening the door to other RL algorithms like GRPO [Shao et al., 2024]).


Our work is related to a nascent line of work that explores using rubrics for language model alignment
and evaluation. Cook et al. [2024] demonstrate that using model-generated checklists can be useful
at inference-time for proprietary LLMs. Similarly, Saha et al. [2023] use generated checklists at
inference time to improve constrained reasoning tasks. [Saad-Falcon et al., 2024] use checklists to
evaluate language models and match our finding that checklists can outperform reward models at
response evaluation. Wang et al. [2025b], contemporaneously to us, introduce a rubric generation
method called “pre-comparison-derived criteria” which also uses candidate responses sampled
from different language models; they show that these criteria improve the agreement of automatic
evaluations of model-generated responses with human judgments. Our work is the first to apply a
similar approach to RL, at the same time as some contemporaneous works. Dineen et al. [2025] use
detailed rubrics that greatly improve model safety. Their work differs from ours by using RL with
explicit rewards (GRPO) and using checklists that were defined at a global level (the same large set
of criteria applied to all tasks) rather than the instruction-specific checklists we espouse in this work.


**7** **Limitations**


We highlight three limitations with our work. First, our implementation of RLCF uses “strongto-weak generalization” – a larger model ( `Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct` ) provides AI judgments for
tuning a smaller model, though RLCF beats other methods also useing a 72B teacher. Second,
we only explored preference-based RL in our work. We believe that using checklist feedback to
train policy gradient-based algorithms is an exciting future research direction. Lastly, our scoring
method is expensive – grading response pairs on each requirement for 130k instructions with
`Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct` takes roughly 4 days on eight H100 GPUs with 80GB GPU memory,
which is computationally infeasible for many practitioners. In Section 5.7, we show that this cost can
be reduced by 50% at some slight cost to accuracy, but further optimization is warranted.


**8** **Conclusion**


We provide a detailed study of reinforcement learning from checklist feedback (RLCF). We propose
a novel algorithm for automatically extracting rubrics from instructions, and we use this algorithm
to construct a dataset of instructions and rubrics, _WildChecklists_ . We demonstrate that RLCF is
uniformly effective at improving strong instruction following models on all benchmarks we consider.


Our study follows an active line of work that highlights the limitations of reward models in supervising
reinforcement learning. One exciting future direction to emerge from this work is: how can we
combine checklist-style feedback with trainable judges? Our current approach relies on carefullydesigned, prompt-based components for rubric generation and response grading under a rubric. Why
is this more effective than methods that naturally learn to grade responses from human preference
data? We believe that analysis of RLCF can motivate better reward models in the future.


10


**Acknowledgements**


We thank Saumya Gandhi, Xiang Yue, Gokul Swamy, Apurva Gandhi, Lintang Sutawika, Jessie
Mindel, Qianou Ma, Chenyang Yang, and Xinran Zhao for helpful discussions and Akhila Yerukola
for invaluable writing assistance and technical advice. We also thank the CMU Foundation and
Language Model (FLAME) Center and Amazon Web Services (AWS) for providing computational
resources that were essential in executing this work. Vijay Viswanathan, Graham Neubig, and
Tongshuang Wu were supported in part by a grant from Apple. Any views, opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and should not
be interpreted as reflecting the views, policies, or position, either expressed or implied, of Apple Inc.


**References**


Michael Xieyang Liu, Frederick Liu, Alexander J. Fiannaca, Terry Koo, Lucas Dixon, Michael Terry,
and Carrie J. Cai. "we need structured output": Towards user-centered constraints on large language
model output. Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2024a. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269042931](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269042931)` .


Wenting Zhao, Xiang Ren, John Frederick Hessel, Claire Cardie, Yejin Choi, and Yuntian Deng.
Wildchat: 1m chatgpt interaction logs in the wild. ArXiv, abs/2405.01470, 2024. URL `[https:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269390491)`
`[//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269390491](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269390491)` .


Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao
Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric Xing, et al. Lmsys-chat-1m: A large-scale real-world llm
conversation dataset. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.


Colin Raffel, Noam M. Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:140:1–140:67, 2019. URL `[https://arxiv.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683)`
`[org/abs/1910.10683](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683)` .


Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. URL `[https://api.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254877310)`
`[semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254877310](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254877310)` .


Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, S. Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun
Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav
Mishra, Adams Wei Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav
Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and
Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. ArXiv, abs/2210.11416, 2022. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253018554](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253018554)` .


Zhangchen Xu, Fengqing Jiang, Luyao Niu, Yuntian Deng, Radha Poovendran, Yejin Choi, and
Bill Yuchen Lin. Magpie: Alignment data synthesis from scratch by prompting aligned llms
with nothing. ArXiv, abs/2406.08464, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270391432)`
`[CorpusID:270391432](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270391432)` .


Nathan Lambert, Jacob Daniel Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze
Brahman, Lester James Validad Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Xinxi Lyu, Yuling Gu, Saumya
Malik, Victoria Graf, Jena D. Hwang, Jiangjiang Yang, Ronan Le Bras, Oyvind Tafjord, Chris
Wilhelm, Luca Soldaini, Noah A. Smith, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, and Hanna Hajishirzi.
Tülu 3: Pushing frontiers in open language model post-training. ArXiv, abs/2411.15124, 2024a.
URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274192505](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274192505)` .


Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeff Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. ArXiv,
abs/1909.08593, 2019. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202660943](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202660943)` .


11


Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, John Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Chris
Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, E Perez, Jamie
Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeff Ladish, J Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, ˙
Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noem’i Mercado, Nova Dassarma, Robert
Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav
Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Sam
Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Benjamin Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish,
Tom B. Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. ArXiv,
abs/2212.08073, 2022. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254823489](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254823489)` .


DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Jun-Mei Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu,
Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiaoling Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F.
Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue, Bing-Li Wang,
Bochao Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong
Ruan, Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Dong-Li Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo
Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Honghui Ding,
Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li, Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jingchang
Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Jiong Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai Dong,
Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Liang Zhao,
Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, M. Tang, Meng
Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qinyu
Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, R. J. Chen, Ruiqi Jin, Ruyi
Chen, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shengfeng Ye, Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu,
Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, S. S. Li, Shuang Zhou, Shao-Kang Wu, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu
Sun, T. Wang, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wen-Xia
Yu, Wentao Zhang, Wangding Xiao, Wei An, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xi aokang Chen,
Xiaotao Nie, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng
Su, Xuheng Lin, X. Q. Li, Xiangyu Jin, Xi-Cheng Shen, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang
Wang, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Xianzu Wang, Xinxia Shan, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei,
Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yichao Zhang,
Yifan Shi, Yi Xiong, Ying He, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu,
Yongqiang Guo, Yuan Ou, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yu-Jing Zou, Yujia He, Yunfan Xiong,
Yu-Wei Luo, Yu mei You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Y. X. Zhu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yi Zheng,
Yuchen Zhu, Yunxiang Ma, Ying Tang, Yukun Zha, Yuting Yan, Zehui Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli
Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhenda Xie, Zhen guo Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang
Yan, Zhiyu Wu, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zi-An Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Zizheng
Pan, Zhen Huang, Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, and Zhen Zhang. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing
reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2501.12948, 2025. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275789950](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275789950)` .


Valentina Pyatkin, Saumya Malik, Victoria Graf, Hamish Ivison, Shengyi Huang, Pradeep Dasigi,
Nathan Lambert, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Generalizing verifiable instruction following, 2025.
URL `[https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02833](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02833)` .


Guanting Dong, Keming Lu, Chengpeng Li, Tingyu Xia, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, and Jingren
Zhou. Self-play with execution feedback: Improving instruction-following capabilities of large
language models. ArXiv, abs/2406.13542, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270620157)`
`[CorpusID:270620157](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270620157)` .


Zhilin Wang, Alexander Bukharin, Olivier Delalleau, Daniel Egert, Gerald Shen, Jiaqi Zeng, Oleksii
Kuchaiev, and Yi Dong. Helpsteer2-preference: Complementing ratings with preferences. ArXiv,
abs/2410.01257, 2024a. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273025954](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273025954)` .


Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Alex D’Amour, Dj Dvijotham,
Adam Fisch, Katherine Heller, Stephen R. Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, Peter Shaw, and Jonathan
Berant. Helping or herding? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. ArXiv, abs/2312.09244, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266210056)`
`[266210056](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266210056)` .


12


Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada,
Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Nathan Sarrazin, Omar
Sanseviero, Alexander M. Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Zephyr: Direct distillation of lm alignment. ArXiv, abs/2310.16944, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264490502)`
`[264490502](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264490502)` .


Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, Wen Sun, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and J. Andrew Bagnell. All roads
lead to likelihood: The value of reinforcement learning in fine-tuning. ArXiv, abs/2503.01067,
2025. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:276742134](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:276742134)` .


Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trkebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Maribeth
Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Jonathan
Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Ramona Comanescu, Fan Yang, A. See, Sumanth Dathathri, Rory Greig,
Charlie Chen, Doug Fritz, Jaume Sanchez Elias, Richard Green, Sovna Mokr’a, Nicholas Fernando,
Boxi Wu, Rachel Foley, Susannah Young, Iason Gabriel, William S. Isaac, John F. J. Mellor,
Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Lisa Anne Hendricks, and Geoffrey Irving. Improving
alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human judgements. ArXiv, abs/2209.14375, 2022. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252596089](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252596089)` .


Yuxin Jiang, Yufei Wang, Xingshan Zeng, Wanjun Zhong, Liangyou Li, Fei Mi, Lifeng Shang, Xin
Jiang, Qun Liu, and Wei Wang. Followbench: A multi-level fine-grained constraints following
benchmark for large language models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264802282](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264802282)` .


Yiwei Qin, Kaiqiang Song, Yebowen Hu, Wenlin Yao, Sangwoo Cho, Xiaoyang Wang, Xuansheng
Wu, Fei Liu, Pengfei Liu, and Dong Yu. Infobench: Evaluating instruction following ability in
large language models. 2024.


Tianle Li, Wei-Lin Chiang, Evan Frick, Lisa Dunlap, Tianhao Wu, Banghua Zhu, Joseph Gonzalez,
and Ion Stoica. From crowdsourced data to high-quality benchmarks: Arena-hard and benchbuilder pipeline. ArXiv, abs/2406.11939, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270562889)`
`[CorpusID:270562889](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270562889)` .


Sukai Huang, Shu-Wei Liu, Nir Lipovetzky, and Trevor Cohn. The dark side of rich rewards: Understanding and mitigating noise in vlm rewards. 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:272832041)`
`[org/CorpusID:272832041](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:272832041)` .


Jonathan Cook, Tim Rocktäschel, Jakob N. Foerster, Dennis Aumiller, and Alex Wang. Ticking all
the boxes: Generated checklists improve llm evaluation and generation. ArXiv, abs/2410.03608,
2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273162357](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273162357)` .


Zhiqing Sun, Yikang Shen, Hongxin Zhang, Qinhong Zhou, Zhenfang Chen, David D. Cox, Yiming
Yang, and Chuang Gan. Salmon: Self-alignment with instructable reward models. In International

Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263831633)`
`[CorpusID:263831633](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263831633)` .


Qwen An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong
Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxin Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming
Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men,
Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, YiChao Zhang, Yunyang Wan, Yuqi Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zihan Qiu, Shanghaoran Quan,
and Zekun Wang. Qwen2.5 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2412.15115, 2024. URL `[https:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274859421)`
`[//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274859421](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274859421)` .


Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural
text degeneration. ArXiv, abs/1904.09751, 2019. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:127986954)`
`[CorpusID:127986954](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:127986954)` .


Haoran Sun, Lixin Liu, Junjie Li, Fengyu Wang, Baohua Dong, Ran Lin, and Ruohui Huang. Conifer:
Improving complex constrained instruction-following ability of large language models. ArXiv,
abs/2404.02823, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268876020](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268876020)` .


13


Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Haotong Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language
model serving with pagedattention. Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261697361](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261697361)` .


Victor Wang, Michael J.Q. Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. Improving llm-as-a-judge inference with the
judgment distribution. ArXiv, abs/2503.03064, 2025a. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:276781945)`
`[org/CorpusID:276781945](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:276781945)` .


Tairan Fu, Raquel Ferrando, Javier Conde, Carlos Arriaga, and Pedro Reviriego. Why do large
language models (llms) struggle to count letters? ArXiv, abs/2412.18626, 2024. URL `[https:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275118941)`
`[//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275118941](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275118941)` .


Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Siddhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou,
and Le Hou. Instruction-following evaluation for large language models. ArXiv, abs/2311.07911,
2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:265157752](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:265157752)` .


Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea
Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. ArXiv,
abs/2305.18290, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258959321](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258959321)` .


Jian Hu, Xibin Wu, Weixun Wang, Dehao Zhang, Yu Cao, OpenLLMAI Team, Netease Fuxi,
AI Lab, and Alibaba Group. Openrlhf: An easy-to-use, scalable and high-performance rlhf framework. ArXiv, abs/2405.11143, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269921667)`
`[269921667](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269921667)` .


Yann Dubois, Bal’azs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Length-controlled alpacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. ArXiv, abs/2404.04475, 2024. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269004605](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269004605)` .


Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. ArXiv, abs/1503.02531, 2015. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7200347)`
`[7200347](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7200347)` .


Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, Zheyan Luo, and Yongqiang Ma. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. ArXiv, abs/2403.13372, 2024.
URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268536974](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268536974)` .


Chris Liu, Liang Zeng, Jiacai Liu, Rui Yan, Jujie He, Chaojie Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Yang Liu, and
Yahui Zhou. Skywork-reward: Bag of tricks for reward modeling in llms. ArXiv, abs/2410.18451,
2024b. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273549327](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273549327)` .


Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences via
multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2024b. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270562658)`
`[270562658](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270562658)` .


Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Daniel Morrison, Lester James Validad Miranda,
Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi,
Noah A. Smith, and Hanna Hajishirzi. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward models for language modeling. ArXiv, abs/2403.13787, 2024b. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268537409)`
`[268537409](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268537409)` .


Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu,
and Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. ArXiv,
abs/2310.01377, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263605623](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263605623)` .


Saumya Malik, Valentina Pyatkin, Sander Land, Jacob Daniel Morrison, Noah A. Smith, Hanna
Hajishirzi, and Nathan Lambert. Rewardbench 2: Advancing reward model evaluation. 2025. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:279119102](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:279119102)` .


Noam Razin, Zixuan Wang, Hubert Strauss, Stanley Wei, Jason D. Lee, and Sanjeev Arora. What
makes a reward model a good teacher? an optimization perspective. ArXiv, abs/2503.15477, 2025.
URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:277112967](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:277112967)` .


14


Paul Röttger, Hannah Rose Kirk, Bertie Vidgen, Giuseppe Attanasio, Federico Bianchi, and Dirk Hovy.
Xstest: A test suite for identifying exaggerated safety behaviours in large language models. ArXiv,
abs/2308.01263, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260378842](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260378842)` .


Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mo Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
Training verifiers to solve math word problems. ArXiv, abs/2110.14168, 2021. URL `[https:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:239998651)`
`[//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:239998651](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:239998651)` .


Stephanie C. Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
falsehoods. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237532606](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237532606)` .


Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony S.
Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aur’elien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Rozière,
Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cris
tian Cantón Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab A. AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriele Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson,
Graeme Nail, Grégoire Mialon, Guanglong Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel M. Kloumann,
Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park,
Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee,
Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe
Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Ju-Qing Jia, Kalyan Vasuden
Alwala, K. Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Keqian Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin R. Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuen ley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Ma hesh Pasupuleti, Mannat
Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melissa
Hall Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
Narjes Torabi, Niko lay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri S. Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne,
Onur cCelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasi´c, Peter Weng, Prajjwal
Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ron nie Polidoro, Roshan
Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sa hana Chennabasappa,
Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon
Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan,
Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas
Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami,
Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Vir ginie Do, Vish Vogeti,
Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whit ney Meers, Xavier Martinet,
Xiaodong Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag,
Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yiqian Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao,
Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zhengxu Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya K. Singh,
Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adi Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria,
Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski,
Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado,
Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani,
Annie Franco, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf
Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Po-Yao (Bernie) Huang,
Beth Loyd, Beto de Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram
Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton,
Catalina Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu,


15


Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer,
Shang-Wen Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi
Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling,
Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman,
Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel,
Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzm’an, Frank J. Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez,
Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman,
Grigory G. Sizov, Guangyi Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah
Wang, Han Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman,
Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James
Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen,
Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon
Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kaixing(Kai)
Wu, U KamHou, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy
Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal
Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, A Lavender, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei
Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav
Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthias Lennie,
Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Michael L.
Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike
Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari,
Mun ish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy ata Bawa, Nayan
Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Ning Zhang,
Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth
Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pe dro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollár, Polina
Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez,
Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin
Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak
Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji
Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy
Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith
Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad,
Sumit Kumar Gupta, Sung-Bae Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney
Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li,
Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi,
Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Andrei
Poenaru, Vlad T. Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes
Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xia Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun
Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi
Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models. ArXiv,
abs/2407.21783, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271571434](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271571434)` .


Team OLMo, Pete Walsh, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Shane Arora, Akshita Bhagia,
Yuling Gu, Shengyi Huang, Matt Jordan, Nathan Lambert, Dustin Schwenk, Oyvind Tafjord,
Taira Anderson, David Atkinson, Faeze Brahman, Christopher Clark, Pradeep Dasigi, Nouha
Dziri, Michal Guerquin, Hamish Ivison, Pang Wei Koh, Jiacheng Liu, Saumya Malik, William
Merrill, Lester James Validad Miranda, Jacob Daniel Morrison, Tyler C. Murray, Crystal Nam,
Valentina Pyatkin, Aman Rangapur, Michael Schmitz, Sam Skjonsberg, David Wadden, Christopher
Wilhelm, Michael Wilson, Luke S. Zettlemoyer, Ali Farhadi, Noah A. Smith, and Hanna Hajishirzi.
2 olmo 2 furious. ArXiv, abs/2501.00656, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275213098)`
`[CorpusID:275213098](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:275213098)` .


Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences
via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. In EMNLP, 2024c.


Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin
Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions. ArXiv,
abs/2304.12244, 2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258298159](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258298159)` .


16


Qi He, Jie Zeng, Qianxi He, Jiaqing Liang, and Yanghua Xiao. From complex to simple:
Enhancing multi-constraint complex instruction following ability of large language models.
In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2024. URL `[https:](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269362443)`
`[//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269362443](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269362443)` .


Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Jun-Mei Song, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li,
Yu Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open
language models. ArXiv, abs/2402.03300, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267412607)`
`[CorpusID:267412607](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267412607)` .


Swarnadeep Saha, Omer Levy, Asli Celikyilmaz, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Xian Li. Branchsolve-merge improves large language model evaluation and generation. ArXiv, abs/2310.15123,
2023. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264591429](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264591429)` .


Jon Saad-Falcon, Rajan Vivek, William Berrios, Nandita Shankar Naik, Matija Franklin, Bertie Vidgen, Amanpreet Singh, Douwe Kiela, and Shikib Mehri. Lmunit: Fine-grained evaluation with natural language unit tests. ArXiv, abs/2412.13091, 2024. URL `[https://api.semanticscholar.](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274788535)`
`[org/CorpusID:274788535](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274788535)` .


Zongqi Wang, Tianle Gu, Chen Gong, Xin Tian, Siqi Bao, and Yujiu Yang. From rankings to insights:
Evaluation should shift focus from leaderboard to feedback. ArXiv, abs/2505.06698, 2025b. URL
`[https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:278501945](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:278501945)` .


Jacob Dineen, Aswin RRV, Qin Liu, Zhikun Xu, Xiao Ye, Ming Shen, Zhaonan Li, Shijie Lu, Chitta
Baral, Muhao Chen, et al. Qa-lign: Aligning llms through constitutionally decomposed qa. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.08123, 2025.


**A** **The role of response pair mining**






|Col1|Col2|Col3|Fol|lowBench|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>||||||||||
|0<br>||||||||||
|0<br>||||||||||
|0<br>5||||||||||
|0<br>5||||||||||


|Col1|Col2|Col3|nFoBe|nc|h (Ove|Col7|ral|Col9|Col10|Col11|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||





Figure 5: Impact of different filtering strategies on model performance on FollowBench and InFoBench. We compare filtering pairs based on overall checklist score differences versus filtering
based on single-aspect score differences, at varying dataset sizes. There are only slight differences
between these two filtering methods, until we start filtering out the vast majority of the data. This
suggests that the reward signal, rather than the specific filtering algorithm, is likely responsible for
this method’s effectiveness.


In our algorithm for learning from checklist feedback, we only train on the 40% of response pairs
that differ the most on at least one criterion. This approach differs from thresholding on the reward
difference with a single scalar reward, which may represent the aggregation of multiple small
differences across all requirements. How much is the filtering component responsible for the success
of RLCF?


To investigate this, we compared two approaches: selecting pairs with the largest differences in
overall weighted checklist scores versus selecting pairs with the largest differences on any single
aspect’s score. As shown in Figure 5, performance shows that, when discarding just 20% or 40%
of response pairs, the method of filtering makes almost no difference. On the other hand, when
discarding 90% of response pairs (with least difference in reward), performance plummets on both
benchmarks, suggesting that, regardless of the filtering strategy, keeping some “harder” response
pairs is beneficial. Rather than aspect-based filtering being the primary driver of improvement, the
results suggest that checklist-based rewards inherently capture more instruction-relevant dimensions
of quality, leading to more effective preference tuning even with moderate filtering.


17


**B** **Prompt for Generating Verification Programs**


We describe the prompt used for generating programs to selectively verify responses in Figure 6.


**C** **Prompt for Scoring Semantic Criteria**


We describe the prompt used for requirement checking in Figure 7.


18


Figure 6: Prompt for generating verification code


19


Figure 7: Prompt for checklist scoring


20


