## **Are Checklists Really Useful for Automatic Evaluation of Generative Tasks?**

**Momoka Furuhashi** [1] _[,]_ [2] **Kouta Nakayama** [2] **Takashi Kodama** [2] **Saku Sugawara** [3] _[,]_ [2]

1 Tohoku University 2 Research and Development Center for Large Language Models,
National Institute of Informatics [3] National Institute of Informatics

furuhashi.momoka.p4@dc.tohoku.ac.jp {nakayama,tkodama,saku}@nii.ac.jp



**Abstract**



Pairwise Comparison





Automatic evaluation of generative tasks using
large language models faces challenges due to
ambiguous criteria. Although automatic checklist generation is a potentially promising approach, its usefulness remains underexplored.
We investigate whether checklists should be
used for all questions or selectively, generate
them using six methods, evaluate their effectiveness across eight model sizes, and identify
checklist items that correlate with human evalu
ations. Through experiments on pairwise comparison and direct scoring tasks, we find that
selective checklist use tends to improve evaluation performance in pairwise settings, while
its benefits are less consistent in direct scoring. Our analysis also shows that even checklist items with low correlation to human scores

often reflect human-written criteria, indicating potential inconsistencies in human evaluation. These findings highlight the need to more
clearly define objective evaluation criteria to
guide both human and automatic evaluations. [1]


**1** **Introduction**






|It is five.|Col2|
|---|---|
|It is four.|It is four.|









Scoring

















Evaluation Model



Are checklists necessary
for evaluating response?



Automatic evaluation using large language models
(LLMs) has been widely adopted for generative
tasks (Chang et al., 2024; Ferraz et al., 2024; Gu
et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). This approach provides an efficient and scalable alternative to costly
and time-consuming human evaluation. However,
it faces two major challenges. First, establishing
clear and consistent evaluation criteria remains dif
ficult, leading to potential ambiguity in scoring.
Second, the correlation between LLM-based au
tomatic evaluation and human evaluation is often

unstable, limiting its reliability.
To address these challenges, previous studies
have introduced a _checklist_ approach that decomposes evaluation criteria into specific, fine-grained


1 Our code is available at [https://github.com/](https://github.com/momo0817/checklist-effectiveness-study)
[momo0817/checklist-effectiveness-study](https://github.com/momo0817/checklist-effectiveness-study)



Figure 1: Examples of using checklists in automatic
evaluation by LLMs. Existing studies use checklists
even in situations where fine-grained criteria may be
unnecessary for evaluating the responses.


items (Lee et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024; Lin et al.,
2025). As shown in Figure 1, when an LLM evaluates responses to mathematical problems, evaluator models can refer to a detailed checklist with

items such as “Does the calculated value match the

correct answer?” and “Does the response contain
unnecessary decimal points?” Although checklists
are easy to use and understand, previous studies
have not fully investigated three key aspects: when
checklists are necessary, how we can create them,
and how checklist items relate to alignment with
human evaluation. We examine the usefulness of

checklists in automatic evaluation by answering the
following three questions shown in Figure 2. RQ1:
_Can we determine whether a checklist is necessary_
_for LLM evaluators?_ RQ2: _How can we create_
_useful checklists?_ RQ3: _Which checklist items con-_


RQ3: Which checklist items contribute to

alignment with human evaluation?



RQ1: Can we determine whether a
checklist is necessary for LLM evaluators?



RQ2: How can we create

useful checklists?












|Checklist is necessary!!<br>Task<br>determine<br>Response<br>Checklist is unnecessary!!|Checklist Type<br>• Baseline<br>• Specify<br>• Length<br>• Self-refine<br>・Does the response include methods<br>for prioritizing tasks effectively?<br>・Does the response state that<br>Mount Everest’s height is 8,849m ?|Checklist Type<br>• Baseline<br>• Specify<br>• Length<br>• Self-refine|Col4|Negative Positive<br>Correlation|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|determine<br>Task<br>Response<br>Checklist is necessary!!<br>Checklist is unnecessary!!|• Baseline<br>• Specify<br>• Length<br>• Self-refine<br>Checklist Type<br>・Does the response include methods<br>for prioritizing tasks effectively?<br>・Does the response state that<br>Mount Everest’s height is 8,849m ?|• Baseline<br>• Specify<br>• Length<br>• Self-refine<br>Checklist Type|||



Figure 2: Our research questions. First, we investigate whether we can identify which responses require checklist
evaluation (RQ1). Next, we study how checklist generation affects alignment with human evaluations by evaluating
eight models of different sizes (RQ2), comparing six different generation methods. Finally, we analyze which
checklist items contribute most to alignment with human evaluation (RQ3).



_tribute to alignment with human evaluation?_


To investigate RQ1 and RQ2, we conduct three
controlled experiments. First, focusing on the consistency of multiple automatic evaluations, we set
a threshold to decide whether a checklist is neces
sary for each evaluation case. Second, we investigate which checklist features improve correlation.
In this process, we create three methods (control
checklist length, more specified generation, and
self-refine) in addition to the baseline and existing
method. Third, we evaluate a total of eight models,
including gpt-4o-2024-08-06 (OpenAI, 2024) and
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2025), to investigate which checklist items contribute to alignment
with human evaluation. For each of these three

aspects, we test their effect on alignment using two
types of human evaluation data: pairwise comparison and direct scoring. To investigate RQ3, we also
conduct a more detailed checklist-based analysis
on the smallest model. We analyze checklist items
both quantitatively and qualitatively, focusing on
their overlap with human-written ones.


Our experiments yield three key findings: First,
we observe that the effectiveness of selective check
list application varies by task; in some cases, it
achieves comparable or better correlations than full
application, while in others it does not. This suggests that checklist use is not universally beneficial.
Second, our analysis reveals that the most useful
checklist creation method varies across different

evaluation models and tasks, suggesting that no single approach works best in all settings. Third, our
analysis shows that many checklist items, although
useless for improving human correlation, still overlap substantially with human-written items. This
suggests that inconsistencies may stem from the
subjective nature of human evaluations and under


scores the need to rethink the objective criteria we
expect from responses.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:


  - We find that selective checklist use sometimes improves evaluation outcomes, suggesting that omitting checklists can be justified in
specific settings.


  - We show that no universally optimal checklist generation method exists, as usefulness
varies significantly depending on the evaluation model and use case.


  - We find that even checklist items with low
correlation to human evaluations often overlap
with human-written ones, indicating they may
still capture valid criteria. This highlights the
subjective nature of human evaluations and
calls for more objective evaluation design.


**2** **Related Work**


Recent studies have investigated the use of LLMs
as evaluators for generative tasks (Chang et al.,
2024; Gu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). Automatic
evaluation methods using LLMs fall into two methods: pairwise comparison (Wei et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024; Lambert et al., 2025;
Tan et al., 2025) and direct scoring (Ye et al., 2024;
Kim et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024). These approaches rely on human evaluation as gold labels
and assess performance via correlation and agreement rates. However, both methods have inherent
limitations: pairwise comparison suffers from ambiguity in evaluation criteria, while direct scoring
faces difficulties in metric definition.


**Fine-grained Evaluation Criteria** Previous
studies have explored breaking down evaluation


criteria into smaller components to improve correlation. Min et al. (2023) evaluate factual accuracy
by splitting responses into individual statements,
each containing a single piece of information. Kim
et al. (2024) manually create 50 scoring rubrics
focusing on critical aspects of response evaluation
and then expand these rubrics using GPT-4. Ye
et al. (2024) enhances evaluation reliability by decomposing their evaluation into skill-level scoring
sets for each instruction.


**Checklist-based Evaluation** Previous studies

have proposed a checklist-based approach that
breaks down complex evaluation criteria into
smaller, more specific points of evaluation (Lee
et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025; Cook
et al., 2024) ． CheckEval (Lee et al., 2024) decomposes evaluation criteria such as fluency into manually created checklists for summarization tasks,
where each item requires a binary yes/no response,
with the final score derived from the ratio of _yes_
responses. Additionally, Qin et al. (2024) manually create 2,500 checklists based on 500 distinct
instructions and conduct comprehensive evaluations using six evaluation models. Furthermore,
WildBench (Lin et al., 2025) establishes a benchmark for evaluating LLMs on real-world-inspired
tasks, generating five to ten checklist items for each
question task by using GPT-4-Turbo and Claude-3Opus. While Cook et al. (2024) shows that LLMgenerated checklists improve correlations, previous
studies have not investigated when checklists are
actually needed or how useful they are.


**3** **Dissecting Checklist-based Evaluation**


To investigate RQ1 and RQ2, we conduct three controlled experiments: First, we investigate whether
it is possible to identify instances where checklists are unnecessary for automated evaluation (Session 3.1); second, we evaluate six different checklist generation methods to determine which types
of checklists are most useful (Session 3.2); third,
we examine the usefulness of checklists using eight
different models, ranging from small to large size,
to assess their practicality (Session 3.3).


**3.1** **Identifying When Responses Need**
**Checklist Evaluation**


To address RQ1: _Can we determine whether a_
_checklist is necessary for LLM evaluators?_, we
compare how well model evaluations correlate with
human evaluation both with and without check


lists. We hypothesise that checklists are necessary
when LLM evaluations lack consistency. Therefore,
we conduct multiple evaluations without checklists
and apply checklists only to responses that receive
inconsistent labels above a threshold. We then

compare this selective approach against two baselines: using no checklists at all ( _None_ ) and using
checklists for every response ( _All_ ). Through this
comparison, we determine if targeting the checklist
use to low-reliability cases improves overall correlation. We conduct this analysis across different
checklist variations described in Section 3.2.


**3.2** **Checklist Generation Policy**


To address RQ2: _How can we create useful check-_
_lists?_, we vary the level of detail and number of
items. To better control these factors, we generate checklists for evaluating generative tasks using
three methods. We analyze how each method correlates to identify the most useful checklist types. Below, we describe each checklist generation method.


**Baseline** In this study, we examine how limiting the number of items and adjusting the level of
detail affect checklist generation. We incorporate
the following three elements: (1) Each item must
allow a simple _yes_ or _no_ answer, where _yes_ confirms success. (2) Criteria must directly relate to
essential task requirements. (3) Questions must
use specific wording and reference input phrasing
directly, concrete wording that directly relates to
the task, avoiding vague or ambiguous language.


**Specify** Previous studies distinguish between two
types of checklist items: surface-level evaluation
(e.g., response correctness) and content-specific
evaluation (e.g., Does the response state that Mount
Everest’s height is 8,849m?). Therefore, we add
to the baseline that checklist questions should be
designed considering possible answers to the input.


**Checklist Length** While previous studies (Lin
et al., 2025; Cook et al., 2024) use a fixed number
of items in their checklists, we hypothesize that
the optimal number of items depends on the task
and should be adjusted accordingly. Therefore,
we evaluate how performance changes when we
generate checklists containing 0.5 and 1.5 times
the number of items for given Baseline checklists.


**Self-refine** Cook et al. (2024) use LLMs to
generate both responses and checklists for tasks,
then evaluate responses using these checklists and


perform multiple rounds of self-refine on the responses. However, they do not apply self-refine
to the checklist generation process itself. In this
study, we extend their approach by implementing
self-refine for the checklists to improve their quality. Specifically, our checklist generation model
generates a Likert scale evaluation and accompanying feedback based on the baseline prompt and uses
this feedback to regenerate improved checklists.


**Ticking** As a representative of existing methods,
we use Cook et al. (2024)’s original prompts. This
prompt includes several examples and a limit on
the number of checklist items, ranging from two
to eight. However, since the original paper does
not specify the examples they use, we remove them
from our implementation.


**3.3** **Evaluator Models of Different Sizes**


Previous studies have used a limited variety of evaluation models. While the InFoBench (Qin et al.,
2024) uses LLMs such as GPT-4 for evaluation,
their smallest model is vicuna-13b-v1.5 (Chiang
et al., 2023), limiting practical applications. Moreover, their analysis includes only a single smaller
model without comparing different sizes of the
same model or exploring how checklist usage affects correlation across varying model sizes. To
address these limitations, we evaluate the usefulness of checklists across eight models ranging from
7B to 32B parameters, including multiple sizes of
the same model family, as detailed in Section 4.3.


**4** **Experiments**


To investigate the usefulness of checklist-based automatic evaluation, this study conducts experiments
on two tasks: (1) a pairwise comparison task, in
which pairs of LLM’s responses are judged for relative quality, and (2) a direct scoring task, in which
LLM’s responses are rated using a Likert scale.


**4.1** **Dataset**


We use datasets with human-annotated LLM re
sponses, which include reliable evaluation labels
and cover diverse real-world tasks with multiple
subsets. Such datasets are rare, as it is uncommon
to find ones that combine both high-quality human evaluation and broad task diversity. The two
datasets we employ sufficiently meet these criteria.


**Pairwise Comparison** For the pairwise comparison task, we use the LLMBar (Zeng et al.,



2024) dataset, which comprises eight English subsets, including three major categories: _Adversarial_,
_Natural_, and _Processed_ . The _Adversarial_ subset
includes inputs specifically designed to mislead
LLMs when used as evaluators, while the _Natural_
subset contains inputs collected and modified from
existing human preference datasets. the LLMBar
dataset exhibits an inter-annotator agreement exceeding 90%, demonstrating its reliability. The
_Processed_ subset consists of processed versions
of three existing datasets (FairEval (Wang et al.,
2024), LLMEval-2 (Zhang et al., 2023), and MTBench (Zheng et al., 2023)). These datasets have
been refined by Zheng et al. (2023) to improve data
fairness. Finally, we obtained manual annotations
for 885 response pairs.


**Direct Scoring** For the direct scoring task, we
use the InFoBench (Qin et al., 2024) dataset. the
InFoBench dataset uses a Likert scale (1 to 5) as
its metric and consists of two English subsets: a
simpler section ( _Easy_ subset) and a more challenging section ( _Hard_ subset). For each input prompt,
responses are collected from five distinct language
models (GPT-3.5-turbo (Ouyang et al., 2022), GPT4, Claude-v1 (Bai et al., 2022), Alpaca-7B (Taori
et al., 2023), and Vicuna-13B (Chiang et al., 2023)).
The responses are then manually annotated by three
expert evaluators, who are natural language processing specialists according to prior research. The
correlation coefficient is reported as 0.353 for the
_Easy_ set and 0.519 for the _Hard_ set. This dataset
consists of the manual evaluation results for five
LLMs’ responses across 50 tasks, resulting in a total of 250 annotated samples. In this study, we determine the gold label for each sample by rounding
the mean of the three manually annotated labels.


**4.2** **Checklist Generation**


Regardless of the variation, each checklist item is
formatted to allow for either a _yes_ or _no_ response.
We employ six different checklist generation policies (detailed in Section 3.2) using gpt-4o-2024-0806 (OpenAI, 2024) as the generation model.


**4.3** **Automatic Evaluation**


To investigate the usefulness of checklists across
different model sizes, we evaluate eight models: gpt-4o-2024-08-06 (GPT-4o), Qwen2.532B-Instruct (Qwen2.5-32B-it), Qwen2.5-7BInstruct (Qwen2.5-7B-it) (Yang et al., 2025),
Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501 (Mistral-Small

(a) Pairwise comparison (the LLMBar)


|Col1|gem|ma-2-9b-it|
|---|---|---|
||||
|one<br>k = 5<br>k = 4|one<br>k = 5<br>k = 4|k = 3<br>k = 2<br>k|


|Qwen2.|.5-7B-it|
|---|---|
|Qwen2|5~~-~~7B~~-~~it|
|||
|ne<br>k = 5<br>k = 4<br>k =|3<br>k = 2<br>k = 1<br>Al|



(b) Direct scoring (the InFoBench)










|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|||||
|||||


|Col1|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||











|Col1|gem|mma-2-9b-it|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
||~~ge~~|~~ma-2-9b-it~~||
|||||
|||||
||||35<br>=0.30All|


|Qwen2|.5-7B-it|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||
|ne<br>=0.70<br>=0.60<br>=0.50<br>=0.45<br>=0.40<br>=0.35<br>=0.30All|ne<br>=0.70<br>=0.60<br>=0.50<br>=0.45<br>=0.40<br>=0.35<br>=0.30All|ne<br>=0.70<br>=0.60<br>=0.50<br>=0.45<br>=0.40<br>=0.35<br>=0.30All|


Figure 3: Comparison of accuracy for checklist application method. _None_ indicates that the checklist is not used
during evaluation, while _All_ signifies that the checklist is applied to every evaluation. The parameter _k_ represents
the threshold for applying the checklist; the smaller the value of _k_, the more frequently the checklist is employed.



24B-it), Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410 (Ministral-8Bit) [2], Gemma-2-27b-it, gemma-2-9b-it (Gemma
Team, 2024), Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Llama-3.18B-it) (Dubey et al., 2024). These models represent
different parameter sizes and capabilities.

For evaluations without checklists, we use Chainof-Thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022). We first
prompt the model to output the reason for its evaluation, and then obtain the final result. For evaluations with checklists, we first ask the evaluation model to choose the evaluation result for each

checklist item from _yes_, _no_, or _n/a_, and then obtain
the final evaluation result. _n/a_ indicates the item is
skipped as it does not apply to the response.

For both tasks, we evaluate each response ten
times. To mitigate position bias in pairwise comparison, we use each order five times. The checklist


2 [https://huggingface.co/mistralai/](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501)
[Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501),
[https://huggingface.co/mistralai/](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410)
[Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Ministral-8B-Instruct-2410)



generation prompts are provided in Appendix A.8.


**4.4** **Evaluation Metrics**


For the pairwise comparison dataset, we use accuracy as the evaluation metric for evaluating the
performance of our automatic evaluation. The final
evaluation result is determined by a majority vote
across multiple evaluations; if the votes are evenly
split, the outcome is considered a tie. However,
because the LLMBar (Zeng et al., 2024) provides
only binary labels (win or lose) and does not include a tie label, we assign a score of 0.5 to a tie
when calculating accuracy. This allows us to treat
accuracy as an expected value under realistic deployment scenarios. This adjustment reflects our
goal of evaluating the potential practical benefits
of checklist-based evaluation.

For the direct scoring dataset, we use Krippendorff’s alpha (Hayes and Krippendorff, 2007) to
measure the agreement between automatic and human labels. The final evaluation result of automatic


evaluation is obtained by taking the mean of ten
evaluations and rounding the value.


**5** **Results**


In total, we generate 22,985 checklist items, specifically 21,475 items in the LLMBar and 1,510 from
the InFoBench. For detailed statistical analysis of
variations and thresholds, see Appendix A.1.


**5.1** **Identifying When Responses Need**
**Checklist Evaluation**


We define a threshold _k_ to determine when to apply
checklists based on evaluation inconsistency. Due
to the different nature of our evaluation tasks, we
use different inconsistency metrics _x_ pairwise and
_x_ direct for each setting.


**Pairwise Comparison Setting** We define the inconsistency value _x_ pairwise as the number of votes
the less-preferred response receives. For example,
if the evaluations for Response 1 and Response
2 are [1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 2 _,_ 2], _x_ pairwise = 3 ; for

[1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 2 _,_ 2 _,_ 2 _,_ 2], _x_ pairwise = 5 . We apply
checklists only when _x_ pairwise _≥_ _k_, where _k_ is
selected from _{_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 _,_ 5 _}_ .


**Direct Scoring Setting** We define the inconsistency value _x_ direct as the standard deviation of
these evaluations. For example, if the evaluation labels are [3 _,_ 3 _,_ 3 _,_ 3 _,_ 4], _x_ direct = 0 _._ 4 ; for

[2 _,_ 3 _,_ 3 _,_ 3 _,_ 4], _x_ direct = 0 _._ 63 . We apply checklists only when _x_ direct _≥_ _k_ . Based on our observations, most _x_ direct values fall in the range
of 0.3 to 0.8, with a notable concentration between 0.3 and 0.5. Therefore, we select _k_ from
_{_ 0 _._ 3 _,_ 0 _._ 35 _,_ 0 _._ 4 _,_ 0 _._ 45 _,_ 0 _._ 5 _,_ 0 _._ 6 _,_ 0 _._ 7 _}_ .


Figures 3a and 3b show the experimental results.
_None_ indicates that no checklist is used during evaluation, while _All_ denotes that all available checklists are applied. Detailed checklist application
rates are provided in Appendix A.2.
Our results demonstrate that the impact of selective checklist application varies across datasets.
In the pairwise comparison, we observe that selective checklist application often improves evaluation
performance over both the _None_ and _All_, for several models, including GPT-4o, Qwen2.5-32B-it,
Gemma-2-27B-it, Gemma-2-9B-it, and Qwen2.57B-it. In the direct scoring, we observe no improvements from selective checklist usage in direct
scoring, where its performance often matches or
falls below that of the _None_ and _All_ .



**Bootstrap Sampling** We also conduct a bootstrap test to evaluate whether the selective application of checklists leads to improvements. For
pairwise comparison, we observe statistically significant differences in 20 out of 48 cases, suggesting that selectively applying checklist items can be
beneficial under certain conditions. On the other
hand, for direct scoring, we observe no statistically significant differences across any of the six
checklist-generation policies evaluated with eight
evaluation models, indicating that this approach
does not yield measurable improvements under the
tested conditions. For detailed settings and results,
see Appendix A.3.


**5.2** **Checklist Generation Policy**


Next, we present the results of the checklist generation policy in Figures 3a, 3b, and Appendix A.2.
We do not find any specific variation that consistently outperforms others. The best checklist variation depends on the evaluation tasks and evaluator models. For pairwise comparison, Specify works well with GPT-4o and Gemma-2-27b-it,
while Ticking suits Ministral-24B-it, Ministral-8Bit, and Llama-3.1-8B-it. In direct scoring, Specify is effective for GPT-4o and Llama-3.1-8B-it,
whereas Self-refine performs best with Ministral24B-it, Ministral-8B-it, and Qwen2.5-7B-it. These
findings suggest that checklist methods should be
adapted to specific evaluator models and tasks.


**Useful and Not Useful Checklist Settings** We
do not find any checklist generation policies that
are consistently superior or inferior across all settings. However, we conduct an in-depth analysis
of which policies are _useful_ or _useless_ for datasets.
Tables 1 and 2 summarize the best and worst performing checklist generation methods, including
_None_ for each dataset. Both Self-refine and Specify tend to perform well across the two datasets.
Specify is useful because it produces checklists
containing more detailed information, which helps
clarify the evaluation criteria. Self-refine, on the
other hand, involves having the LLMs revise the
baseline checklist, often resulting in more refined
and input-relevant items. This iterative refinement
may improve evaluation quality.
Conversely, in the LLMBar, the worstperforming approach is _None_ . For 6 out of 8 evaluation models, _None_ results in the lowest performance. In the InFoBench, Baseline shows the low
est correlation for half of the evaluation models.


Model GPT-4o Qwen2.5-32B-it gemma-2-27b-it Ministral-24B-it gemma-2-9b-it Ministral-8B-it Llama-3.1-8B-it Qwen2.5-7B-it


Best Policy Specify Length * (0.5, 1.5) Specify Ticking Self-refine Ticking Ticking Self-refine


Worst Policy Self-refine None None None None None None Length * 0.5


Table 1: Best and worst settings of checklist use for each evaluation model in the pairwise comparison.


Model GPT-4o Qwen2.5-32B-it gemma-2-27b-it Mistral-Small-24B-it gemma-2-9b-it Llama-3.1-8B-it Ministral-8B-it Qwen2.5-7B-it


Best Policy Specify Length * 1.5 Length * 1.5 Self-refine Length * 0.5 Specify Self-refine Self-refine


Worst Policy Baseline Baseline Length * 1.5 Length * 1.5 Specify Baseline Baseline Ticking


Table 2: Best and worst settings of checklist use for each evaluation model in the direct scoring.



These findings suggest that using any checklist benefits pairwise comparison evaluation, whereas the
choice of generation method requires more careful
consideration for direct scoring evaluation.


**5.3** **Model Sizes**


Finally, we analyze how much correlation with
human evaluation improves when small evaluator
models use checklists. In the direct scoring dataset,
we observe that increasing checklist usage (i.e.,
lowering the threshold _k_ ) contributes to higher correlation with human ratings for some models, such
as Gemma-2-27b-it and Mistral-8B-it. In contrast,

—
for other models including both larger and smaller
ones — checklist application does not substantially
affect correlation, suggesting a limited contribution
to alignment with human evaluation. In the pairwise comparison dataset, checklists only slightly
improve the accuracy of small models, indicating
limited usefulness since evaluators may already
implicitly consider checklist elements.


**6** **Analysis**


To investigate RQ3: _Which checklist items con-_
_tribute to alignment with human evaluation?_, We
conduct ablation and qualitative analyses to identify factors affecting evaluation performance.


**6.1** **Ablation on Checklist Effectiveness**


**Experimental Setup** We define two types of
checklist items. A _positive_ item is one whose re
moval from the checklist leads to a _decrease_ in

correlation with human evaluation, while a _nega-_

_tive_ item is one whose removal leads to an _increase_

in correlation. These definitions indicate whether
the presence of a checklist item contributes to or
hinders alignment with human evaluation. Since
ablating each individual checklist item is computationally expensive, we adopt a two-step approach.



In the first step, we classify each checklist–not individual items–based on whether its use improves
alignment with human evaluation. To measure
alignment, we define a score ∆¯ _s_ all as:


∆¯ _s_ all = _|s_ ¯ gold _−_ _s_ ¯ none _| −|s_ ¯ gold _−_ _s_ ¯ all _|_ (1)


where ¯ _s_ gold represents the mean score given by
human annotators, while ¯ _s_ all and ¯ _s_ none are mean
scores from the model (Qwen2.5-7B-it) with and
without checklists, respectively. Based on ∆¯ _s_ all
and predefined thresholds, we classify each checklist as _positive_ (it improves alignment with human
evaluations) or _negative_ (it reduces alignment).
In the second step, we analyze individual checklist items within each group. To quantify the contribution of each item, we define another score:


∆¯ _s_ abl = _|s_ ¯ gold _−_ _s_ ¯ all _| −|s_ ¯ gold _−_ _s_ ¯ abl _|_ (2)


where ¯ _s_ abl is the mean evaluation score after removing a specific checklist item. If the removal of an
item leads to lower alignment, it is classified as a
_positive_ checklist item; if it leads to higher alignment, it is classified as a _negative_ one. For details
on the classification and analysis of checklist items,
see Appendix A.5.1 and A.5.2.


**Quantitative Results** We first report the classification result of the checklist items contained in
generated checklists for the LLMBar and the InFoBench. In the LLMBar, 53.5% of the checklists
used in _positive checklists_ are classified as _positive_
_checklist items_ (1,079 out of 2,018), while 42.0%
of the items in _negative checklists_ are classified
as _negative checklist items_ (3,847 out of 9,157).
In the InFoBench, all items in _positive checklists_
are classified as _positive checklist items_ (56 out of
56), while 40.7% of the items in _negative check-_
_lists_ are classified as _negative_ (599 out of 1,472).


Figure 4: _Negative_ checklists ablation results on LLMBar dataset. Each plot shows how removing checklist
items impacts correlation with human evaluation. _Nega-_
_tive checklist items_ ( ∆¯ _s_ abl ) are highlighted in red. About
40% of checklist items fall in the _negative_ region.


Dataset Open Closed


LLMBar 75 10

InFoBench 43 7


Table 3: Open vs. closed classification of questions. the
LLMBar questions are sampled as 10% from each of
the 8 subsets (85 in total), while all 50 questions from
the InFoBench are classified.


We then examine the impact of the _negative check-_
_list items_ on alignment with human evaluations, as
shown in Figure 4, using results generated by the
Baseline. These figures show how removing such
items affects evaluation scores compared to using
all checklist items. For a comprehensive view of
the effects across different checklist types and generation methods, including _positive_ and _negative_
items, refer to Appendix A.5.3.
These results indicate that a substantial portion
of the generated checklist items in _negative check-_
_lists_ contribute to reduced alignment with human
evaluations. However, the impact of such negative
items-measured by the change in ∆¯ _s_ abl is generally small, suggesting that they do not significantly
degrade evaluation quality even when present.


**6.2** **Open vs. Closed Question Classification**


We hypothesize that the effectiveness of checklists may depend on the type of question: closed
questions may yield more consistent evaluations,
whereas open-ended ones can introduce greater
variability. To explore this, we manually classify
questions in each dataset based on whether their responses tend to converge ( _closed_ ) or diverge ( _open_ ).
For the LLMBar, we sample 10% of questions from
each of its eight subsets, while for the InFoBench,
we analyze all 50 questions. Table 3 shows the classification results. In both datasets, _open_ questions
outnumber _closed_ ones, suggesting that subjective



Positive Negative
# Label


B H G B H G


H 17 3     - 50 46     
G 29     - 27 75     - 27


Table 4: Checklist quality comparison in the InFoBench.
We analyze 274 items (116 human-written, 158 generated). B, H, and G denote items appearing in both,
only human, and only generated checklists, respectively.
More than half of the items appear in both sets, indicating a notable overlap between human and generated
checklist items.


or ambiguous questions are more prevalent. Such
questions are more likely to lead to unstable evaluation outcomes and lower agreement with human
evaluations, even when using checklists.


**6.3** **Overlap Analysis of Human and**
**Generated Checklists in the InFoBench**


We manually check the InFoBench checklist items
to analyze the extent of overlap between humanwritten and generated items (274 in total: 116
human-written, 158 generated). Over half of the
items appear in both sets, indicating substantial
overlap. Here, _both_ means checklist items that are
semantically equivalent and correspond to the same
question. For instance, the generated checklist item
_“Does the letter have approximately 250 words?”_
closely corresponds to the human-written item _“Is_
_the generated recommendation letter around 250_
_words? (Output Attribute)”_ . Table 4 summarizes
the distribution of items by checklist type. Items

—
unique to the generated set those without over
—
lap with human-written items often reflect additional perspectives or considerations that, while not
explicitly stated in the question, are important for
evaluating the response. In contrast, checklist items
exclusive to the human-written set tend to focus

more on verifying the output format.


**6.4** **Human Annotation of Checklist Items**


To identify checklist item characteristics affecting
alignment with human evaluations, we qualitatively
analyze 293 items, including 89 _positive_ and 102
_negative_ items (see Appendix A.6.1). We define
six functional labels for _positive_ items and four for
_negative_ ones. Representative examples of generated checklist items are shown in Figure 5. Our
annotation shows that 60% of _positive_ items explicitly reflect key question elements, aligning with
essential response components, while about 30%


Closed questions and _Positive checklist items_ (From Question1)


・Does the response identify “they” in sentence (a) as referring to “the authorities”?
・Does the response identify "they" in sentence (b) as referring to "the demonstrators"?
・Does the response provide reasoning for the identification of "they" in each sentence?


Closed questions and _Negative checklist items_ (From Question3)


・Does the response correctly translate "good evening" into French as "bonsoir"?
・Is the translation appropriate for the context typically

associated with greeting someone in the evening?



Open questions and _Positive checklist items_ (From Question2)


・Does the rewritten email maintain a professional tone throughout?
・Does the email clearly state the request for a day off, including the specific date?
・Does the email address the employer politely and respectfully?


Open questions and _Negative checklist items_ (From Question4)


・Does the response summarize “The Shining” in one sentence?
・Is the response humorous or witty, reflecting a playful critique or observation?







Figure 5: Examples of _positive_ and _negative_ checklist items by question type ( _open_ vs. _closed_ ).



capture important evaluative aspects not explicitly
mentioned. For _negative_ items, around 10% fail
to adequately address response content, suggesting room for improvement; however, over 85% are
consistent and deemed usable upon manual review.
Furthermore, 77% of these _non-negative_ items overlap with criteria created by human-written checklists (see Appendix A.6.2 for details).


**6.5** **Analysis by Checklist Generation Policy**


We also analyze checklist generation policies to
examine their characteristics. For example, when
handling mathematical problems like “Compute
the derivative of 2 _x_ [2] + 5 _x_ ”, the Baseline method
generates checklists that break down elements into
individual items, such as “Does the response correctly apply the power rule to compute the derivative of 2 _x_ [2] ?” ． For this problem, we observe little
difference in the generated checklists among the
Checklist Length * 0.5, Length * 1.5, and Selfrefine methods. In contrast, the Specify method
can generate more specific check items that include
correct responses while maintaining itemization
similar to the Baseline, such as “Did the response
simplify the derivative correctly to 4 _x_ + 5 ?” We
also find that different generation methods generate
similar checklists. For example, when asking to ex
—
plain machine learning and its types supervised,

—
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning with
real-world examples, all methods generate similar items checking basic elements, such as “Does
the response elaborate on the differences between
supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning?”. In contrast, for the task asks how to increase productivity while working from home, the
Baseline generates abstract items, such as “Are the
suggestions in the response actionable and clear?”,
while the Checklist Length * 1.5 includes more
specific requirements, such as “Is there guidance



on setting goals or prioritizing tasks while working
from home?”. For detailed checklist examples, see
Appendix A.7.


**Discussion** These findings suggest two key directions for future work. First, human evaluations
sometimes rely on checklist items with ambiguous
criteria or unclear scoring methods that fail to accurately capture response quality. This highlights the
need to improve the design of human evaluation
protocols. Notably, even _negative_ checklist items
often overlap with human-written ones, underscoring the difficulty of establishing clear evaluation
standards. This observation aligns with Hosking
et al. (2024), who highlight inconsistencies and
biases in human evaluations. Second, the overlap between generated and human-written checklist items suggests that LLMs can produce reliable
and interpretable ones. Combining such generated
checklists with human evaluation could improve
overall evaluation reliability, rather than relying exclusively on either human or automatic evaluation.


**7** **Conclusion**


We investigate checklist usefulness by focusing on
three key questions: determining whether a checklist is necessary for LLM evaluators, designing
useful checklists, and analyzing which items are
effective. Our experiments show that checklists do
not always improve evaluations, and even _negative_
items often overlap with human-written ones, revealing limitations in current human evaluations.
This highlights the need to reconsider what makes
an ideal checklist item that effectively combines
human insight and automatic methods, targets relevant criteria, and adapts to different responses.
Future work should focus on improving checklist
creation and evaluation practices to ensure more
reliable and meaningful evaluations.


**Limitations**


Despite the comprehensiveness of our study, several limitations should be acknowledged. First,
while our datasets encompass a diverse range of
input tasks, we utilize only a single English dataset
for both the pairwise comparison and direct scoring
tasks. This constraint may limit the generalizability of our findings across different generative tasks
and languages. Second, although we design our
checklist generation policies to ensure broad coverage of possible checklist generation methods, there
may exist alternative methods that we have not
considered, such as those explicitly based on predefined evaluation criteria. Finally, while the models
used in our experiments cover multiple families of
LLMs, they may still be insufficient to fully capture
the necessary features of current LLMs, potentially
limiting the scope of our conclusions.


**Acknowledgments**


The authors would like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments. This work
was supported by JST FOREST Grant Number
JPMJFR232R. In this work, we used the “mdx:
a platform for building data-empowered society”.
We thank Satoru Katsumata, Hiroaki Sugiyama,
Yugo Murawaki, and Sadao Kurohashi for their
constructive comments and suggestions that helped
improve this paper.


**References**


Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda
Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan,
Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion,
Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac
Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume,
Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel
Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom
Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah,
Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. [Training](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862)
[a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforce-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862)
[ment learning from human feedback.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862) _Preprint_,
arXiv:2204.05862.


Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu,
Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi,
Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. 2024. A survey on evaluation of large language models. _ACM_
_Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology_,
15(3):1–45.


Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng,
Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion



[Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An open-](https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/)
[source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt](https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/)
[quality.](https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/)


Jonathan Cook, Tim Rocktäschel, Jakob Foerster, Den[nis Aumiller, and Alex Wang. 2024. Ticking all the](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03608)
[boxes: Generated checklists improve llm evaluation](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03608)
[and generation.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03608) _Preprint_, arXiv:2410.03608.


Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang,
Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev,
Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurélien
Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Rozière, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie
Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe
Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller,
Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits,
David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan,
Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes,
Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova,
Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic,
Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme Nail, Grégoire Mialon,
Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov,
Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel M. Kloumann, Ishan
Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan
Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar,
Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock,
Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi,
Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu,
Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph
Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia,
Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate
Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, and
[et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models.](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.21783) _CoRR_,
abs/2407.21783.


Thomas Palmeira Ferraz, Kartik Mehta, Yu-Hsiang Lin,
Haw-Shiuan Chang, Shereen Oraby, Sijia Liu, Vivek
Subramanian, Tagyoung Chung, Mohit Bansal, and
[Nanyun Peng. 2024. LLM self-correction with De-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.458)
[CRIM: Decompose, critique, and refine for enhanced](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.458)
[following of instructions with multiple constraints.](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.458)
In _Findings of the Association for Computational_
_Linguistics: EMNLP 2024_, pages 7773–7812, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.


[Gemma Team. 2024. Gemma.](https://doi.org/10.34740/KAGGLE/M/3301)


Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan,
Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen,
Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun
Zhang, Yuanzhuo Wang, Wen Gao, Lionel Ni,
[and Jian Guo. 2025. A survey on llm-as-a-judge.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15594)
_Preprint_, arXiv:2411.15594.


[Andrew F. Hayes and Klaus Krippendorff. 2007. An-](https://doi.org/10.1080/19312450709336664)
[swering the call for a standard reliability measure for](https://doi.org/10.1080/19312450709336664)


[coding data.](https://doi.org/10.1080/19312450709336664) _Communication Methods and Measures_,
1(1):77–89.


Tom Hosking, Phil Blunsom, and Max Bartolo. 2024.

[Human feedback is not gold standard. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=7W3GLNImfS) _The Twelfth_
_International Conference on Learning Representa-_
_tions_ .


Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Shayne Longpre,
Bill Yuchen Lin, Jamin Shin, Sean Welleck, Graham
Neubig, Moontae Lee, Kyungjae Lee, and Minjoon
[Seo. 2024. Prometheus 2: An open source language](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.248)
[model specialized in evaluating other language mod-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.248)
[els. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.248) _Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empir-_
_ical Methods in Natural Language Processing_, pages
4334–4353, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.


Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison,
LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi,
[Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2025. Re-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl.96)
[wardBench: Evaluating reward models for language](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl.96)
[modeling. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl.96) _Findings of the Association for Compu-_
_tational Linguistics: NAACL 2025_, pages 1755–1797,
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Yukyung Lee, Joonghoon Kim, Jaehee Kim, Hyowon
[Cho, and Pilsung Kang. 2024. Checkeval: Robust](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18771)
[evaluation framework using large language model](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18771)
[via checklist.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18771) _Preprint_, arXiv:2403.18771.


Dawei Li, Bohan Jiang, Liangjie Huang, Alimohammad
Beigi, Chengshuai Zhao, Zhen Tan, Amrita Bhattacharjee, Yuxuan Jiang, Canyu Chen, Tianhao Wu,
[Kai Shu, Lu Cheng, and Huan Liu. 2025. From gen-](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16594)
[eration to judgment: Opportunities and challenges of](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16594)
[llm-as-a-judge.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16594) _Preprint_, arXiv:2411.16594.


Bill Yuchen Lin, Yuntian Deng, Khyathi Raghavi
Chandu, Abhilasha Ravichander, Valentina Pyatkin,
Nouha Dziri, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2025.
[Wildbench: Benchmarking llms with challenging](https://openreview.net/forum?id=MKEHCx25xp)
[tasks from real users in the wild. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=MKEHCx25xp) _ICLR_ .


Yixin Liu, Alexander Fabbri, Jiawen Chen, Yilun Zhao,
Simeng Han, Shafiq Joty, Pengfei Liu, Dragomir
Radev, Chien-Sheng Wu, and Arman Cohan. 2024.
[Benchmarking generation and evaluation capabili-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.280)
[ties of large language models for instruction control-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.280)
[lable summarization. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.280) _Findings of the Association_
_for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024_, pages
4481–4501, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for
Computational Linguistics.


Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis,
Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle[moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore:](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741)
[Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741)
[in long form text generation. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741) _Proceedings of the_
_2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural_
_Language Processing_, pages 12076–12100, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.



OpenAI. 2024. [GPT-4 Technical Report.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774) _Preprint_,
arXiv:2303.08774.


Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
[Training language models to follow instructions with](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155)
[human feedback.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155) _Preprint_, arXiv:2203.02155.


Yiwei Qin, Kaiqiang Song, Yebowen Hu, Wenlin Yao,
Sangwoo Cho, Xiaoyang Wang, Xuansheng Wu, Fei
[Liu, Pengfei Liu, and Dong Yu. 2024. InFoBench:](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.772)
[Evaluating instruction following ability in large lan-](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.772)
[guage models. In](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.772) _Findings of the Association for_
_Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024_, pages 13025–
13048, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Sijun Tan, Siyuan Zhuang, Kyle Montgomery,
William Y. Tang, Alejandro Cuadron, Chenguang
Wang, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2025.
[Judgebench: A benchmark for evaluating llm-based](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12784)
[judges.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12784) _Preprint_, arXiv:2410.12784.


Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann
Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang,
and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Stanford alpaca:
An instruction-following llama model. [https://](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca)
[github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca.](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca)


Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu,
Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Lingpeng Kong, Qi Liu,
[Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui. 2024. Large Language](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.511)
[Models are not Fair Evaluators.](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.511) In _Proceedings_
_of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for_
_Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_,
pages 9440–9450, Bangkok, Thailand. Association
for Computational Linguistics.


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
[and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of thought prompt-](https://openreview.net/forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J)
[ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J)
_Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_ .


An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu,
Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang,
Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu,
Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng
Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren,
Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang,
Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and
[Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115) _Preprint_,
arXiv:2412.15115.


Seonghyeon Ye, Doyoung Kim, Sungdong Kim, Hyeonbin Hwang, Seungone Kim, Yongrae Jo, James
[Thorne, Juho Kim, and Minjoon Seo. 2024. FLASK:](https://openreview.net/forum?id=CYmF38ysDa)
[Fine-grained language model evaluation based on](https://openreview.net/forum?id=CYmF38ysDa)


[alignment skill sets. In](https://openreview.net/forum?id=CYmF38ysDa) _The Twelfth International_
_Conference on Learning Representations_ .


Zhiyuan Zeng, Jiatong Yu, Tianyu Gao, Yu Meng, Tanya
Goyal, and Danqi Chen. 2024. Evaluating large language models at evaluating instruction following. In
_International Conference on Learning Representa-_
_tions (ICLR)_ .


Xinghua Zhang, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Yangyu Lv,
Tingwen Liu, Fei Huang, Hongbo Xu, and Yongbin
[Li. 2023. Wider and Deeper LLM Networks are](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01862)
[Fairer LLM Evaluators.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01862) _Preprint_, arXiv:2308.01862.


Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang,
[Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685)
[LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685)
_Preprint_, arXiv:2306.05685.


**A** **Appendix**


**A.1** **Checklist Statistics**


Tables 5 and 6 show the statistical metrics of check
lists for the LLMBar and the InFoBench, respectively. Also, if a checklist cannot be obtained due
to an API error or a formatting issue in the response, we regenerate it up to three times. To ensure meaningful comparisons, we filter the datasets
to include only questions with consistent checklist
counts across all evaluation instances.


Variations Min Max Ave S.D Sum


Baseline 1 19 4.63 1.51 3,488

Ticking 2 10 4.92 1.02 3,710

Specify 1 16 5.05 1.54 3,807

Length * 0.5 1 10 2.27 0.74 1,714

Length * 1.5 2 28 6.98 2.38 5,266


Table 5: Statistical breakdown of generated checklists
for each version of the LLMBar. We generate checklists
for 754 inputs.


**A.2** **Checklists Application Rate**


Figures 6 and 7 present the checklist application
rates for different threshold values in pairwise comparison and direct scoring tasks, illustrating how
the threshold _k_ influences the proportion of responses evaluated with checklists.


**A.3** **Bootstrap Sampling**


We conduct a bootstrap test to evaluate whether the
selective application of checklists leads to improvements ． For the bootstrap procedure, we perform



Variations Min Max Ave S.D Sum


Baseline 2 9 4.9 1.64 245

Ticking 3 9 5.3 1.32 265

Specify 2 9 5.32 1.69 266

Length * 0.5 1 4 2.46 0.85 123

Length * 1.5 3 14 7.34 2.53 367


Table 6: Statistical breakdown of generated checklists
for each version of the InFoBench. We generate checklists for 250 tasks.


1,000 resampling iterations, fix the random seed to
42, and determine statistical significance based on
95% confidence intervals.
For pairwise comparison, we observe statistically significant differences in 20 out of 48 cases ．
The detailed results for each model are presented
below.


  - GPT-4o: Shows statistically significant differences for all checklist-generation policies
(6/6).


  - Qwen2.5-32B-it: Shows significant differences for Baseline, Length _×_ 0.5, and Selfrefine (3/6).


  - Gemma-2-27B-it: Shows no significant difference for any checklist-generation policies
(0/6).


  - Gemma-2-9B-it: Shows significant differences for all checklist-generation policies
(6/6).


  - Qwen2.5-7B-it: Shows significant differences
for all checklist-generation policies except
Ticking (5/6).


  - The other three models (Mistral-Small-24B-It,
Ministral-8B-It, and Llama-3.1-8B-It) do not
show any significant differences (0/6 for each
model).


**A.4** **Checklist Retention Rates after Filtering**


The filtering process results in different checklists
retention rates across our datasets, as shown in Table 7. In the LLMBar dataset, approximately 90%
of checklists are retained for the Ticking and Specify checklist policies, while other categories experience a significant reduction to around 25% of the
original checklist count. In contrast, the InFoBench
dataset maintains 100% of checklists across all


|Col1|Col2|Col3|GPT|-4o|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||
|||~~ge~~|~~mma~~|~~-2-9~~|~~-it~~|||
|||||||||


|Col1|Col2|Qw|en2.|5-32|B-it|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||
|||~~Lla~~|~~ma-3~~|~~.1-8~~|~~B-it~~|||
|||||||||


|Col1|Col2|gemm|a-2-2|7b-it|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||||
|||~~Minis~~|~~tral-8~~|~~-it~~|||
||||||||


|Col1|Col2|Mistr|al-Sma|ll-2|4B-i|t|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||
|||~~Q~~|~~en2.5~~|~~-7B~~|~~-it~~|||
|||||||||



Figure 6: Checklists application rate in the pairwise comparison (LLMBar).










|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|GPT|-4o|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||
||||~~gem~~|~~ma~~|~~-2-~~|~~b-i~~|~~t~~|||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>||


|Col1|Col2|Q|wen|2.|5-32|B-i|t|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||
|||~~L~~|~~lam~~|~~a-3~~|~~.1-8~~|~~B-i~~|~~t~~|||
|||~~L~~|~~lam~~|~~a-3~~|~~.1-8~~|||||
|||||||||||
|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>||


|Col1|Col2|g|emm|a-2-2|7b-|it|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||||||
||||~~Minis~~|~~tral-8~~|~~B-it~~||||
||||||||||
|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>||


|Col1|Col2|Mistr|al-Sma|ll-24|B-it|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||
|||~~Q~~|~~en2.5~~|~~-7B-i~~|~~t~~|||
|||||||||
|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>|e<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>5<br>0<br>||



Figure 7: Checklists application rate in the direct scoring (InFoBench).



policies, indicating more consistent checklist application in this dataset. A detailed breakdown
of the checklist classification can be found in Figures 8 and 9. In the LLMBar dataset, both _pos-_
_itive_ and _negative_ checklists each constitute approximately 20% of the total checklists, with the
remainder falling into the _neutral_ category. The
InFoBench dataset shows a different distribution,
with _positive_ and _negative_ checklists each representing only about 2% across most checklist policies.
The Length * 1.5 and Self-refine policies stand out
as exceptions, with negative checklists surpassing
5% in these cases.


**A.5** **Ablation Checklist**


**A.5.1** **Selecting Checklist for Ablation**


We determine which checklists to use for the ab
lation of checklist items. To this end, we classify
each checklist as:


  - **Positive Checklists** : ∆¯ _s_ all _≥_ threshold (significantly improves accuracy)


  - **Negative Checklists** : ∆¯ _s_ all _≤−_ threshold
(significantly degrades accuracy)



We set different threshold values for each dataset:

0.3 for the pairwise comparison dataset and 1.5 for
the direct scoring dataset. We then use the selected
positive and negative checklists for checklist item
ablation.


**A.5.2** **Ablation Checklist Items**

Based on ∆¯ _s_ abl, we select the final positive and
negative checklist items as follows:


  - **Positive Checklist Item** : checklist item with

∆¯ _s_ abl < 0, indicating that removing this checklist item degrades performance compared to
using all checklists.


  - **Negative Checklist Item** : checklist item with
∆¯ _s_ abl  - 0, indicating that removing this checklist item improves performance compared to
using all checklists.


**A.5.3** **Results of Checklists After Ablation**

Figure 10 shows that positive checklist items predominantly cluster around the 0.0 score, indicating their limited impact on evaluation performance.
Similarly, Figure 11 illustrates that nearly half of
the negative checklist items have final scores between 0.0 and 0.1, suggesting that their negative


Figure 8: This figure presents the improvement scores computed for LLMBar across different policies. For each
policy, the positive and negative checklists respectively comprise approximately 20% of the total items.
The subfigures are arranged as follows: the top row shows the Baseline, Ticking, and Specify checklist policies; the
bottom row shows the Length * 0.5, Length * 1.5, and Self-refine policies.


|40<br>30<br>20<br>10<br>0|Mean: -0.140<br>Median: 0.00<br>No Change<br>Threshold (+<br>Threshold (-<br>Positive<br>Negative|To<br>0 Po<br>Ne<br>Ne<br>1.5) Me<br>1.5) Me<br>St|tal: 250<br>sitive: 4 (1.6%)<br>gative: 8 (3.2%)<br>utral: 238 (95.2%)<br>an: -0.140<br>dian: 0.000<br>d: 0.670|
|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br>40<br><br>||||


|Col1|Mean: -0.250|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br>40<br>|Mean:~~-~~0.250<br>Median:~~-~~0.200<br>No Change<br>Threshold (+1.5)<br>Threshold (~~-~~1.5)<br>Positive<br>Negative|Total: 250<br>Positive: 3 (1.2%)<br>Negative: 4 (1.6%)<br>Neutral: 243 (97.2%)<br>Mean:~~-~~0.250<br>Median:~~-~~0.200<br>Std: 0.669||
|0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br>40<br>|Mean:~~-~~0.250<br>Median:~~-~~0.200<br>No Change<br>Threshold (+1.5)<br>Threshold (~~-~~1.5)<br>Positive<br>Negative|Total: 250<br>Positive: 3 (1.2%)<br>Negative: 4 (1.6%)<br>Neutral: 243 (97.2%)<br>Mean:~~-~~0.250<br>Median:~~-~~0.200<br>Std: 0.669||


















|30|Mean: -0.192|2|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|5<br>10<br>15<br>20<br>25<br>30<br>|Mean:~~-~~0.19<br>Median:~~-~~0.3<br>No Change<br>Threshold (+<br>Threshold (~~-~~<br>Positive<br>Negative|00<br>1.5)<br>1.5)<br>To<br>Po<br>Ne<br>Ne<br>Me<br>Me<br>St|tal: 250<br>sitive: 2 (0.8%)<br>gative: 6 (2.4%)<br>utral: 242 (96.8%)<br>an:~~-~~0.192<br>dian:~~-~~0.300<br>d: 0.706|
|5<br>10<br>15<br>20<br>25<br>30<br>||||


















|20<br>15<br>10<br>5<br>0|No Change<br>Threshold (+<br>Threshold (-<br>Positive<br>Negative|Ne<br>1.5) Me<br>1.5) Me<br>St|utral: 236 (94.4%)<br>an: -0.179<br>dian: -0.100<br>d: 0.706|
|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>5<br>10<br>15<br>20<br>||||



Figure 9: This figure shows improvement scores calculated on InFoBench. For each evaluation policy, approximately
5% of checklists are classified as positive or negative.
The subfigures are arranged as follows: the top row shows the Baseline, Ticking, and Specify checklist policies; the
bottom row shows the Length * 0.5, Length * 1.5, and Self-refine policies.


|120 140 Positive Checklist Item ( S_all < 0) Mean: -0.154|Positive Checklist Item ( S_all < 0) Mean: -0.154|ms Total: 59 Mean: -0 Median: Std: 0.33|
|---|---|---|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>20<br>40<br>60<br>80<br>100<br><br><br>Mean:~~-~~0.154<br>Median:~~-~~0.071|Mean:~~-~~0.154<br>Median:~~-~~0.071|Std: 0.3<br>Positive<br>Positive|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>20<br>40<br>60<br>80<br>100<br><br><br>Mean:~~-~~0.154<br>Median:~~-~~0.071|Mean:~~-~~0.154<br>Median:~~-~~0.071|~~0.2~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.2~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>~~0.~~<br>Contribution Score|
















|40 Positive Checklist Item ( S_all < 0) Mean: -0.092|Positive Checklist Item ( S_all < 0) Mean: -0.092|ms Total: 13 Mean: -0 Median: Std: 0.32|
|---|---|---|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br><br>Mean:~~-~~0.092<br>Median: 0.000|Mean:~~-~~0.092<br>Median: 0.000|Std: 0.3<br>Positive<br>Positive|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br><br>Mean:~~-~~0.092<br>Median: 0.000|Mean:~~-~~0.092<br>Median: 0.000|~~0.2~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.2~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>~~0.~~<br>Contribution Score|














|40 Positive Checklist Item ( S_all < 0)|Positive Checklist Item ( S_all < 0)|ms Total: 20 Mean: -0|
|---|---|---|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br><br><br> ( S_all < 0)<br>Mean:~~-~~0.143<br>Median:~~-~~0.056|( S_all < 0)<br>Mean:~~-~~0.143<br>Median:~~-~~0.056|Median:<br>Std: 0.33<br>Positive<br>Positive|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br><br><br> ( S_all < 0)<br>Mean:~~-~~0.143<br>Median:~~-~~0.056|||
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>10<br>20<br>30<br><br><br> ( S_all < 0)<br>Mean:~~-~~0.143<br>Median:~~-~~0.056||~~0.2~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.2~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>~~0.~~<br>Contribution Score|



Figure 10: Positive checklist ablation results on the LLMBar dataset. Each plot shows how removing checklist
items impacts correlation with human evaluation. _Positive_ checklist items ( ∆¯ _s_ abl < 0) are highlighted in green. Most
scores lie between -0.1 and 0.1. The six generation policies — Baseline, Ticking, Specify, Length*0.5, Length*1.5,
Self-Refine — are arranged top-left to bottom-right. All but Length0.5 have over 50% _positive_ checklist items;
Length0.5 falls below 40%.
















|800 Negative Checklist It ( S_all > 0) Mean: 0.055|Negative Checklist It ( S_all > 0) Mean: 0.055|tems Total: 28 Mean: 0. Median: Std: 0.33|
|---|---|---|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>200<br>400<br>600<br><br>Mean: 0.055<br>Median: 0.000|Mean: 0.055<br>Median: 0.000|Std: 0.3<br>Negative<br>Negative|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>200<br>400<br>600<br><br>Mean: 0.055<br>Median: 0.000|Mean: 0.055<br>Median: 0.000|~~0.2~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.2~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>~~0.~~<br>Contribution Score|
















|200 Negative Checklist It ( S_all > 0)|Negative Checklist It ( S_all > 0)|tems Total: 76 Mean: 0.|
|---|---|---|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br><br><br>( S_all > 0)<br>Mean: 0.032<br>Median: 0.000|( S_all > 0)<br>Mean: 0.032<br>Median: 0.000|Mean: 0<br>Median:<br>Std: 0.31<br>Negative<br>Negative|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br><br><br>( S_all > 0)<br>Mean: 0.032<br>Median: 0.000|||
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br><br><br>( S_all > 0)<br>Mean: 0.032<br>Median: 0.000||~~0.2~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.2~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>~~0.~~<br>Contribution Score|














|250 Negative Checklist It ( S_all > 0) Mean: 0.033|Negative Checklist It ( S_all > 0) Mean: 0.033|tems Total: 87 Mean: 0. Median: Std: 0.32|
|---|---|---|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br><br><br>Median: 0.000|Median: 0.000|Negative<br>Negative|
|~~1.0~~<br>~~0.8~~<br>~~0.6~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br><br><br>Median: 0.000|Median: 0.000|~~0.2~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.2~~<br>~~0.4~~<br>~~0.~~<br>Contribution Score|



Figure 11: Negative checklist ablation results on the LLMBar dataset. Each plot shows how removing checklist
items impacts correlation with human evaluation. _Negative_ checklist items ( ∆¯ _s_ abl - 0) are highlighted in red. Most
scores lie between -0.1 and 0.1. The order of plots matches that of the _positive_ checklist items. For all checklist
generation policies, the proportion of checklists in the final negative region is around 40%.


|Total: 16 Mean: -0.631 Median: -0.700 Std: 0.179|Col2|
|---|---|
|Std: 0.179<br>Positive Checklist Items:16<br>Positive Rate: 100.0%||
|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|


|2.5|5 ( S_all < 0) Mean: -1.008|Median: -1.000 Std: 0.262|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|2.0<br><br>ency|Mean:~~-~~1.008<br>Median:~~-~~1.000|Std: 0.262<br>Positive Checklist Items:13<br>Positive Rate: 100.0%||
|2.0<br><br>ency|Mean:~~-~~1.008<br>Median:~~-~~1.000|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|


















|Total: 5 Mean: -0.940 Median: -0.900 Std: 0.206|Col2|
|---|---|
|Std: 0.206<br>Positive Checklist Items:5<br>Positive Rate: 100.0%||
|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|


|2.0 uency|Mean: -0.943<br>Median: -0.900|Std: 0.090<br>Positive Checklist Items:7<br>Positive Rate: 100.0%|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|2.0<br><br>ency|Mean:~~-~~0.943<br>Median:~~-~~0.900|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|
















|Total: 8 Mean: -0.875 Median: -0.850 Std: 0.139|Col2|
|---|---|
|Std: 0.139<br>Positive Checklist Items:8<br>Positive Rate: 100.0%||
|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>bution Score|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>bution Score|


|2.5|5 ( S_all < 0) Mean: -0.743|Median: -0.700 Std: 0.090|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|2.0<br><br>ency|Mean:~~-~~0.743<br>Median:~~-~~0.700|Std: 0.090<br>Positive Checklist Items:7<br>Positive Rate: 100.0%||
|2.0<br><br>ency|Mean:~~-~~0.743<br>Median:~~-~~0.700|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|



Figure 12: Positive checklist ablation results on the InFoBench dataset. Each plot shows how removing checklist
items impacts correlation with human evaluation. _Positive_ checklist items ( ∆¯ _s_ abl < 0) are highlighted in green. All
checklists are _positive_ checklist items.
































|Negative Checklist Items: 93<br>Negative Rate: 34.96%|Col2|
|---|---|
|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|


|30 35 40 Negative Checklist Ite ( S_all > 0) Mean: -0.004 Median: 0.000|0 5 0 Negative Checklist Ite ( S_all > 0) Mean: -0.004 Median: 0.000|ems Total: 142 Mean: -0.004 Median: 0.000 Std: 0.503 Negative Checklist Items: 47|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~2.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>0<br>5<br>10<br>15<br>20<br>25<br>30<br>Frequency<br><br>Median: 0.000|Median: 0.000|Negative Checklist Items: 47<br>Negative Rate: 33.1%||
|~~2.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>0<br>5<br>10<br>15<br>20<br>25<br>30<br>Frequency<br><br>Median: 0.000|Median: 0.000|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|
















|Negative Checklist Items: 98<br>Negative Rate: 36.84%|Col2|
|---|---|
|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>ution Score|


|20 25 Negative Checklist Ite ( S_all > 0) Mean: -0.016 Median: -0.067|0 5 Negative Checklist Ite ( S_all > 0) Mean: -0.016 Median: -0.067|ems Total: 266 Mean: -0.016 Median: -0.067 Std: 0.583 Negative Checklist Items: 117|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~2.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>0<br>5<br>10<br>15<br><br>Frequency<br>Median:~~-~~0.067|Median:~~-~~0.067|Negative Checklist Items: 117<br>Negative Rate: 43.98%||
|~~2.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>0<br>5<br>10<br>15<br><br>Frequency<br>Median:~~-~~0.067|Median:~~-~~0.067|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|~~0.5~~<br>~~0.0~~<br>~~0.5~~<br>~~1.0~~<br>~~1.5~~<br>~~2.0~~<br>~~2.5~~<br>Contribution Score|



Figure 13: Negative checklist ablation results on the InFoBench dataset. Each plot shows how removing checklist
items impacts correlation with human evaluation. _Negative_ checklist items ( ∆¯ _s_ abl - 0) are highlighted in red. Most
scores lie between -0.5 and 0.5. For all checklist generation policies, the proportion of checklists in the final negative
region is from 30% to 50%.


**Checklist Policy** **Original** **Verified** **Reduced** **Verified Ratio (%)** **Dataset**


Baseline 3488 879 2609 25.2 LLMBar
Ticking 3722 3365 357 90.4 LLMBar
Specify 3821 3467 354 90.7 LLMBar
Length * 0.5 1714 391 1323 22.8 LLMBar
Length * 1.5 5266 1349 3917 25.6 LLMBar
Self-refine 3490 862 2628 24.7 LLMBar


Baseline 245 245 0 100 InFoBench
Ticking 265 265 0 100 InFoBench
Specify 266 266 0 100 InFoBench
Length * 0.5 123 123 0 100 InFoBench
Length * 1.5 367 367 0 100 InFoBench
Self-refine 244 244 0 100 InFoBench


Table 7: Checklist verification results for each method on the LLMBar and the InFoBench, including the number
of original, verified, and reduced checklists, and the reduced ratio for each checklist policy. The results show
significant variation in checklist reduction, with Ticking and Specify methods achieving the highest reduction ratios
on both datasets, while other methods like Length*0.5 show lower reductions.



impact is also minimal. Across different policies,
negative checklist items consistently represent approximately 40% of all negative checklists.
However, the proportion of positive checklists
that qualify as positive checklist items varies significantly across policies. For example, in the Baseline, over 60% of positive checklists (100 out of
160), whereas in the Length * 0.5, less than 40%
meet this criterion (53 out of 137).
In the InFoBench dataset, we identify 56 items
as positive checklists and 1472 items as negative
checklists in Figure 12 and 13. Notably, all positive checklists qualify as positive checklist items,
while 599 items (40.7%) qualify as negative checklist items. The majority of these negative checklist items have final scores between -0.5 and 0.5.
Across different policies, negative checklist items
represent between 30% and 50% of all negative
checklists. Almost all positive checklist items in
the InFoBench dataset demonstrate final scores below -0.5, suggesting they consistently bring evaluation results closer to gold labels, albeit by a small
margin.


**A.6** **Qualitative Analysis**


**A.6.1** **Threshold Determination for**

**Qualitative Analysis of Checklist**
**Effectiveness**

We detail the specific criteria used to identify checklists with a substantial impact on evaluation performance in each dataset. These thresholds serve as

the basis for our qualitative analysis.
For the LLMBar dataset, we analyze the following:


  - _Positive_ checklist items with ∆¯ _s_ abl < 0 _._ 9




  - _Negative_ checklist items with ∆¯ _s_ abl   - 0 _._ 9


Applying these stringent criteria, we identify 33
items (1.6% of checklists) and 102 items (2.6% of
negative checklists) as having a substantial impact
on evaluation.

For the InFoBench dataset, we examine the following:


  - All positive checklist items _Negative_ checklist
items with ∆¯ _s_ abl   - 0 _._ 9


These thresholds yield 56 items (All positive checklist items) and 102 items (6.9% of negative checklists) that show notable influence on evaluation
quality.


**A.6.2** **In-Depth Qualitative Analysis of**
**Generated Checklist Items**


We conduct a qualitative analysis focusing on
checklist items that significantly impact evaluation
performance, aiming to identify which characteristics contribute to alignment with human evaluation.
Based on this analysis, we identify six labels for
_positive_ checklist items and four labels for _negative_

ones.

The following are the _positive_ labels:


  - **Explicit Focus (Explicit)** : The checklist item
clearly states which aspect of the question the
response should focus on.


  - **Implicit Focus (Implicit)** : The focus is not
explicitly stated in the item, but it reflects an
important aspect necessary for answering or
evaluating the question.


Task





Positive



Neither












|Is the subject line appropriate and<br>Baseline<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>Baseline<br>professional tone throughout?<br>Length Is the subject line appropriate and<br>* 0.5 relevant to the content of the email?<br>Length Does the email clearly state the request<br>* 0.5 for a day off, including the specific date?<br>Self- Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>refine professional tone throughout?<br>Self- Is the subject line appropriate and<br>refine relevant to the content of the email?|Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>Specify<br>professional tone throughout?<br>Specify Does the email clearly state the request for<br>a day off, including the specific date?<br>Length<br>Does the response rewrite the email in a<br>* 1.5<br>more professional tone?<br>Length Does the response maintain the subject<br>* 1.5 line relevant to requesting vacation time?|
|---|---|
|Baseline<br>Baseline<br>Length<br>* 0.5<br>Length<br>* 0.5<br>Self-<br>refine<br>Self-<br>refine<br>Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>professional tone throughout?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Does the email clearly state the request<br>for a day off, including the specific date?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>professional tone throughout?|Negative|
|Baseline<br>Baseline<br>Length<br>* 0.5<br>Length<br>* 0.5<br>Self-<br>refine<br>Self-<br>refine<br>Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>professional tone throughout?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Does the email clearly state the request<br>for a day off, including the specific date?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?<br>Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>professional tone throughout?|Ticking<br>Ticking<br>Does the rewritten email maintain a<br>professional tone throughout?<br>Is the subject line appropriate and<br>relevant to the content of the email?|



Figure 14: All checklist policies’ checklist items. We use Qwen2.5-7B-it as the evaluation model and select the
following task from the InFoBench. In the ablation result, we categorize outputs as _Positive_, _Negative_, or Neither,
and we show one example. For this task, the Baseline, Length*0.5, and Self-refine variants produce outputs labeled
as _Positive_ . In contrast, only the Ticking variant produces _Negative_ checklist items.




 - **Proposal Answer (Ans)** : The item encourages or expects a concrete answer, such as a
proposal or opinion, in the response.


 - **Clarity** : The item evaluates how easy the response is to understand, such as “Is the response informative and provides a clear explanation?”.


 - **Additional Content (Add)** : The item includes aspects not strictly required to answer
the question, but still useful for checklistbased evaluation.


 - **Tone** : The item assesses the appropriateness
of the response’s tone or style, such as “Is the
language clear and formal, appropriate for a
legal notice?”.


The following are the _negative_ labels:


 - **Non-negative** : Although classified as a _neg-_
_ative_ item, it is still reasonably usable as a
checklist item for the given question.


 - **Limited Content (Limited)** : The item reflects only a narrow or insufficient aspect of



the response, failing to adequately capture its
quality.


  - **Clarity** : The item evaluates how easy the response is to understand, such as “Is the response logically consistent with the analogy
format presented in the question?”.


  - **Additional Content (Add)** : The item includes aspects not strictly required to answer
the question, but still useful for checklistbased evaluation.


Tables 9 and 10 present the distribution of _posi-_
_tive_ and _negative_ checklist item labels for the LLMBar and the InFoBench, respectively. These tables
illustrate how frequently each label type appears in
the generated checklists.


**A.7** **Generate Checklist Example**


Table 8 shows an analysis of evaluators and checklists in the InFoBench. This example illustrates
how the evaluation results change for multiple evaluators when comparing the cases without a checklist (N) and with a checklist (C), in relation to human labels (H). It also presents the corresponding


Evaluator Task H N C Checklist



Qwen2.5- Identify the programming language used to write 5 5 3 □ Does the response correctly identify the use of the
7B-it the given code. ‘printf’ function as characteristic of the C programming

language?

if (20 _>_ 18) printf(“20 is greater than 18”);       - Does the response recognize the syntax of the condi
tional statement as typical of C-style languages?

gemma-2- A confirmation email should be written appro- 5 3 5 □ Does the response confirm the details of the scheduled
27b-it



Qwen2.5- Identify the programming language used to write
7B-it the given code.



if (20 _>_ 18) printf(“20 is greater than 18”);



gemma-2- A confirmation email should be written appro- 5 3 5 □ Does the response confirm the details of the scheduled
27b-it priately for the situation. A meeting has been meeting?

scheduled, and the sender expects the other to      - Does the response mention that the recipient is exreview the slides. pected to review the slides before the meeting?


Ministral- Think of alternatives and paraphrases for the 5 3 5 □ Does the response provide alternatives to the word
8B-it underlined word.



A confirmation email should be written appropriately for the situation. A meeting has been
scheduled, and the sender expects the other to
review the slides.



what we have _expected



5 3 5 □ Does the response provide alternatives to the word
“expected”?

  - Does the response offer paraphrases that fit in the
context of “what we have expected”?



Table 8: Analysis of evaluator and checklists in InFoBench: examples of models with significant changes in
correlation when using checklists (H: human labels, N: without checklists, C: checklists applied to a response).



Pos Explicit Implicit Ans Clarity Add Tone


LLMBar 18 5 3 2 5 0

InFoBench 33 20 0 0 2 1

Sum 51 25 3 2 7 1


Table 9: Label distribution of checklist items classified
as _positive_ . The majority ( ≈ 60%) are **Explicit Focus**
**(Explicit)** items, clearly aligning with elements explicitly stated in the question. About 30% are **Implicit**
**Focus (Implicit)**, reflecting important but implicit evaluation criteria.


checklists used in each case. Qwen2.5-7B-it shows
lower evaluation performance when using a checklist, reducing its alignment with human judgments.
In contrast, Gemma-2-27B-it and Mistral-8B-it improve their alignment with human evaluations when
using checklists.

Figure 14 shows all the checklist policies’ checklist items. We use Qwen2.5-7B-it as an evaluation
model and one of the _open_ questions as a task.
The column labeled “Ablation Result” reports the
outcome of ablation studies conducted on individ
ual checklist items. Items marked as _Positive_ con
tribute to alignment with human evaluations, while
those marked as _Negative_ do not. Items labeled

_Neither_ show no clear effect in either direction. For

each policy, we provide two representative examples to illustrate the effects.


**A.8** **Prompts for Checklist Generation and**
**Response Evaluation**


Figures 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19 present the prompt
used for generating checklists(Baseline, Specify,



Neg Non-negative Limited Clarity Add


LLMBar 85 11 3 3

InFoBench 92 10 0 0

Sum 177 21 3 3


Table 10: Distribution of textitnegative checklist item
labels. While more than 85% of the checklist items la
beled as **Non-negative** are still aligned with the question
and valid upon manual inspection, about 10% are found
to be **Limited Content (Limited)** in evaluating the response, suggesting room for improvement in checklist
quality.


Length,Self-refine, and Ticking). We use GPT-4o
as the generation model.
Figures 20, 21, 22, and 23 present the prompts
used for evaluating responses. Figures 20 and 21
show the evaluation prompts for the pairwise comparison datasets, while Figures 22 and 23 show the
prompts for the direct scoring datasets.


In order to evaluate the AI's response to the input, please create a checklist based on the input.


Checklist questions should:

  - **Be answerable by “yes” or “no”**, with “yes" meaning that the response successfully met the corresponding requirement.

  - **Be comprehensive, but concise**, meaning that all criteria directly relevant to the input should be represented by a question,

but only questions that are very clearly relevant should be included.

  - **Be precise**, meaning that checklist questions should avoid vague wording and evaluate specific aspects of a response,

directly using the phrasing of the input where appropriate.


You should always analyze the input before providing an evaluation checklist.
Please enclose each checklist item in double square brackets and output in the following format:


Analysis: Please state the analysis for the input
Checklist:


  - [[Item 1]]

  - [[Item 2]]


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


Figure 15: Prompt used in the Baseline.


In order to evaluate the AI's response to the input, please create a checklist based on the input.


Checklist questions should:

  - **Be answerable by “yes” or “no”**, with “yes” meaning that the response successfully met the corresponding requirement.

  - **Be comprehensive, but concise**, meaning that all criteria directly relevant to the input should be represented by a question,

but only questions that are very clearly relevant should be included.

  - **Be precise**, meaning that checklist questions should avoid vague wording and evaluate specific aspects of a response,

directly using the phrasing of the input where appropriate.

  - **Be considerate of expected answers**, meaning that checklist questions should be designed while taking into account

possible answers to the input.


You should always analyze the input before providing an evaluation checklist.
Please enclose each checklist item in double square brackets and output in the following format:


Analysis: Please state the analysis for the input
Checklist:


  - [[Item 1]]

  - [[Item 2]]


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


Figure 16: Prompt used in the Specify.


In order to evaluate the AI's response to the input, please create a checklist based on the input.


Checklist questions should:

  - **Be answerable by “yes” or “no”**, with “yes” meaning that the response successfully met the corresponding requirement.

  - **Be comprehensive, but concise**, meaning that all criteria directly relevant to the input should be represented by a question,

but only questions that are very clearly relevant should be included.

  - **Be precise**, meaning that checklist questions should avoid vague wording and evaluate specific aspects of a response,

directly using the phrasing of the input where appropriate.

  - **Be comprised of {n} items**, meaning that the checklist must contain {n} questions.


You should always analyze the input before providing an evaluation checklist.
Please enclose each checklist item in double square brackets and output in the following format:


Analysis: Please state the analysis for the input
Checklist:


  - [[Item 1]]

  - [[Item 2]]


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


Figure 17: Prompt used in the Checklist Length. First, the number of checklist items for the Baseline method is
calculated. Then, the prompt instructs to generate a checklist with the number of items multiplied by 0.5 or 1.5.


Please refine the given checklist for evaluating the AI's response according to the following steps:


1. Evaluate each checklist item based on the requirements below.


Checklist questions should:

  - **Be answerable by “yes” or “no”**, with “yes” meaning that the response successfully met the corresponding requirement.

  - **Be comprehensive, but concise**, meaning that all criteria directly relevant to the input should be represented by a question,

but only questions that are very clearly relevant should be included.

  - **Be precise**, meaning that checklist questions should avoid vague wording and evaluate specific aspects of a response,

directly using the phrasing of the input where appropriate.


2. Rate each checklist item on a 5-point size (1 = lowest, 5 = highest) and provide feedback. Present your evaluation using the format below:


Checklist Evaluation:

1. [Item 1] - [Rating]: [Feedback]
2. [Item 2] - [Rating]: [Feedback]


3. Refine the checklist based on this feedback. Enclose each checklist item in double square brackets and output them in the following format:


Refined Checklist:


  - [[Item 1]]

  - [[Item 2]]


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


[Start of Base Checklist]
{checklist}

[End of Base Checklist]


Figure 18: Prompt used in the Self-refine. First, LLM generates checklists using the Baseline method. Next,
LLM outputs a Likert scale (1-to-5) evaluation and its rationale for the generated checklists. Finally, based on this
rationale, LLM regenerates checklists.


Please help judge an AI assistant's response to an instruction by providing an evaluation checklist.
To write a specific evaluation checklist, you get given the following entity each time:
INSTRUCTION: An instruction that has been given to an AI assistant.


## Task Details

Your task is to come up with an evaluation checklist list for a given INSTRUCTION.
This evaluation checklist should be a list of questions that ask whether or not specific criteria relevant to the INSTRUCTION were met by an AI assistant's response.
Criteria covered by your checklist could be explicitly stated in the INSTRUCTION, or be generally sensible criteria for the problem domain.
You should, however, try to be concise and not include unnecessary entries in your checklist.


Checklist questions should:

 - **Be answerable by “yes” or “no”**, with “yes” meaning that the response successfully met the corresponding requirement.

 - **Be comprehensive, but concise**, meaning that all criteria directly relevant to the INSTRUCTION should be represented by a question,

but only questions that are very clearly relevant should be included.

 - **Be precise**, meaning that checklist questions should avoid vague wording and evaluate specific aspects of a response,

directly using the phrasing of the INSTRUCTION where appropriate.


You should always analyze the INSTRUCTION before providing an evaluation checklist.
## Response Format
Analysis: xxx
Checklists:


 - [[item1]]

 - [[item2]]


## Real Task


### INSTRUCTION

{question}


### Response
Please analyze the instruction and provide an answer in the correct format.
Remember that each question should be phrased such that answering with “yes” would mean that the response **successfully** fulfilled the criteria being assessed by the question.
In most cases, your checklist should contain at least two questions, but no more than eight.


Figure 19: Prompt uses in the Ticking. We use TICKing’s (Cook et al., 2024) prompt. Since their paper does not
contain examples that they use, we remove the specific in-context examples to use this prompt.


Please evaluate the answers according to the following procedure:


1. Evaluate the two responses to the input.
2. First, state the reason for your evaluation. Then decide which answer is better: 1 or 2.
3. Output your response in the following JSON format:
“““ json
{{

“reason“: “Please state the reason for evaluation“,
“judge“: 1,
}}

“““

4. Do NOT output anything other than the JSON format.


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


[Start of Response 1]
{response_1}

[End of Response 1]


[Start of Response 2]
{response_2}

[End of Response 2]


Figure 20: Prompt used for pairwise response comparison, conducted **without** any checklist-based evaluation
criteria.


Please evaluate the answers according to the following procedure:


1. Evaluate the two responses to the input.
2. Use the given checklist for your evaluation.
3. For each item in the checklist, output “yes”, “no”, or “n/a” if it does not apply.
4. Compare the two responses based on the checklist.
5. Decide which answer is better: 1 or 2.
6. Output your response in the following JSON format:
“““json
{{

{{
“checklist”:


“response_1”: {{
“1”: “yes”,
“2”: “no”,
“3”: “n/a”
}},
“response_2”: {{
“1”: “no”,
“2”: “n/a”,
“3”: “yes”
}}
}}
“judge”: 1,
}}

”””

7. Do not output anything other than the JSON format.


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


[Start of Checklist]
{checklist}

[End of Checklist]


[Start of Response 1]
{response_1}

[End of Response 1]


[Start of Response 2]
{response_2}

[End of Response 2]


Figure 21: Prompt used to evaluate response pairs using checklist-based criteria.


Please evaluate the following response according to the procedure below:


1. Evaluate the response to the input on a size of 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest).
2. First, state the reason for your evaluation. Then provide the overall rating (1-5).
3. Use the following guidelines for each rating:

Rating-1 (Very Bad): The model's response is entirely irrelevant to the input posed. It demonstrates no understanding of the requested task.
Rating-2 (Bad): While there is a minimal degree of relevance to the original input, the response is predominantly incorrect, confusing, or both.
Rating-3 (Okay): The response shows some relation to the posed input but lacks critical details or includes inaccuracies.
Rating-4 (Good): This rating is given when the response is mostly accurate and comprehensive. However, it might include slight errors or omit minor details.
Rating-5 (Excellent): A response receiving this rating is entirely accurate, detailed, and aligns perfectly with the requirements of the input.
4. Output your response in the following JSON format:
```json
{{

`reason': `Explain the rationale for the rating',
`rating': 3
}}```

5. Do NOT output anything other than the JSON format.


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


[Start of Response]
{response}

[End of Response]


Figure 22: Prompt used for direct scoring evaluation without checklists.


Please evaluate the following response according to the procedure below:


1. Evaluate the response to the input on a size of 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest).
2. Use the given checklist for your evaluation.
3. For each item in the checklist, output “yes,” “no,” or “n/a” if it does not apply.
4. Evaluate the response based on the checklist.
5. Use the following guidelines for each rating:

Rating-1 (Very Bad): The model’s response is entirely irrelevant to the input posed. It demonstrates no understanding of the requested task.
Rating-2 (Bad): While there is a minimal degree of relevance to the original input, the response is predominantly incorrect, confusing, or both.
Rating-3 (Okay): The response shows some relation to the posed input but lacks critical details or includes inaccuracies.
Rating-4 (Good): This rating is given when the response is mostly accurate and comprehensive. However, it might include slight errors or omit minor details.
Rating-5 (Excellent): A response receiving this rating is entirely accurate, detailed, and aligns perfectly with the requirements of the input.
6. Output your response in the following JSON format:
“““json
{{

“checklist”: {{

“1”: “yes”,
“2”: “no”,
“3”: “n/a”
}}
“rating”: 3,
}}

“““

7. Do NOT output anything other than the JSON format.


[Start of Input]
{question}

[End of Input]


[Start of Checklist]
{checklist}

[End of Checklist]


[Start of Response]
{response}

[End of Response]


Figure 23: Prompt used for direct scoring evaluation with checklists.


